
--- Page 1 ---
Culture in Islamic Spain

“Commanded by the [Qur‘an] to seek knowledge and read nature for
signs of the Creator, and inspired by a treasure trove of ancient Greek
learning, Muslims created a society that in the Middle Ages was the
scientific center of the world. The Arabic language was synonymous

with learning and science for 500 years, a golden age that can count among its

credits the precursors to modern universities, algebra, the names of the stars and
even the notion of science as an empirical inquiry.” This is how New York

Science Editor Dennis Overbye characterized the culture of Islam in the oY

‘Ages. Among its hallmarks were the introduction of Plato and Aristotle to Europe,

along with the newly developed algebra (from the Arabicaljabr) and

algorithms (from the Arabic al-Khwaridhmi, the man who: a

development such as telescopes and microscopes, and new agricultural products

such as oranges (from the Arabic naran)), lemons (fi bic laimon),
artichokes (from the Arabic ardi shoki), cotton (from bic, qutun), and

‘sugar cane (from the Arabic sukkar). Muslim scientists wéte cited by Copernicus,

and the great historian Ibn Khaldun (4, 1406) to be quoted on such

issues as tribal solidarity and the relationship between tax cuts and inflation.

Historian Arnold Toynbee called Ibn Khaldun's Mugaddimah (“Introduction”)

“the greatest work of its kind that has been created by any mind.”

Crusades, a series of battles Py: wo centuries thet would ply Midtn Bape
against the Muslim Middle ‘unsuccessful in their the Crusades
did have serious impact in,the region. They exacerbated tensions regional rulers,
some of whom allied with tHe Europeans, and weakened the extended Abbasid
regime. The overlapped with the onslaught from

during Europe's Middle Ages and the gs of
the Protestant Reformation. However, by the time
se ir religious differences (if not their differences with Jews),
the Muslim empires, Were seriously weakened. The newly organized European states
capitalized on their @arlier explorations into Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia, and
Sectntr of most of the Muslim world by the end of the 19th century.

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS

--- Page 2 ---
Taqwa, Spirituality, and Sufism

Muslims believe that sincere belief will be manifested outwardly in
righteous actions. However, the core of those actions is still internal. Pious
actions result from giving oneself to the divine will, and in so doing
committing oneself to do what one can to achieve the divine will. This

combination of acceptance and commitment is expressed in the Qur'an as the
Virtue taqwa. The Qur'an never defines the term, in the sense of limiting it to some
specific action or actions. Instead, it gives examples of the kind of behavior that
stems from a well formed conscience. For example, the Qur‘an tells)people not to
allow other people's unjust actions to lead them to unfair behavior. "So long as [the
polytheists) stay true to you, stay true to them, Indééd, God loves those with
taqwa.” (9:7) Taqwa may be described as the willing choicet6 allow one’s conscience
to be quided by God, expressed externally through goodness and charity.

Scholars and lawyers can help guide understanding and actions. However,
making God's will your own requires spiritual practice. This inward, spiritual
aspect of Islamic practice, Sufism, \is often alled “interior Islam.” It can also be
described as mature Islam. Whereasiaictild is motivated to do good and avoid
evil based on the promise of reward and the threat of punishment, amature
believer takes personal gratification in virtuous deeds and finds evil Ueeds
personally repugnant. Sufi tedings and practice grew in Islam asia Way to help
people develop this ability td take joy in virtue.

FIGURE 6.14 Mevievis, known as Whirling Dervishes for their spinning spiritual
dbce, are followers of Rumi. © Atantde Phototra


--- Page 3 ---
Over the centuries Muslims have developed many ways to cultivate spirituality.
Religious poetry remains among the most popular, and the 13th century Afghan
Sufi Jalal al-Din Rumi is perhaps the most popular poet of all time. Translations of
his works by Coleman Barks are best sellers in America today. His poetry expresses
the yearning for spiritual freedom that characterizes much of Sufism. Itis a desire
to be released from the bonds of selfishness, desire, and greed, to be completely

absorbed in divine goodness and beauty. The key to spiritual awareness, he says,
will not be found in books:

Let the beauty we love be what we do. Yy

There are hundreds of ways to kneel and kiss the ground.
> ae

The Modern Period: Reform and ry

By the time European powers had established cont ‘most Muslim lands, Muslim
intellectuals were well aware that the time was ripe for reform. This became clear to some ./>
thinkers as early as the Crusades. Legal authority Ibn Taymiyya of Damascus (4. 1328) Y
warned of the need for vigilance and i 9. The great historian Ibn Khaldun’

Islamic Spain (4. 1406) cautioned of of governments overly

their own power and called for recommitment to justice as the basis of social solidarity and
political strength. In the 16th centuries, reformers such as Sirhindi

(4. 1624) struggled to refocus the energies of the Indian Muslim communityyahd in Arabia
Nabemnad Se eae

However, the warnings
reforms that would have_

The 19th lidati
the exponential of reform efforts in the Muslim
to struggle

with

of foreign control, or vice versa? And
they take them all on at once, or work
with France against Britain, or Britain France?

As it happened, the Muslim ies gained independence only in the past half
century, and then only one at a time. France was defeated in a brutal war of
independence in Algeria, for eximple, in 1962. Libya's Italian overlords were defeated in
World War II but the was then placed under international control until 1951.
Egypt evicted the Britishyin a military coup in 1952. Syria - which traditionally included
the current countriés of Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Jordan, and the Palestinian Territories —
aia aa

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS 8

--- Page 4 ---
divided up into several countries, in fact. And that situation was made more complex by
the influx of European Jews attempting to escape European persecution. The eventual
declaration of the state of Israel in 1948 then displaced hundreds of thousands of non-
Jewish (both Muslim and Christian) Palestinians; their numbers have increased so that
today the number of stateless Palestinians is estimated at over 6 million. India gained
independence from Britain in 1947 but Britain partitioned the country into Hindu-
majority and Muslim-majority countries, leaving the status of Kashmir (which was Hindu
ruled but with a Muslim majority) unresolved, as it remains today. Indonesia ~ the most
populous Muslim country in the world today ~ gained independence from the Dutch in
1949, and the state of Malaysia came into being in 1963, after moreithan a century asa set
of disparate British colonies.

In most Muslim countries, independence was achieved through armed struggle, leaving
the military dominant, as in many other parts of the formetly colonized world. The rise of
military and other forms of non-popular “. S
struggles adds yet another layer of complexity to the

‘The combination of economic and political
given rise to a variety of specifically modern

from Western Europe. The ostensible these models to produce results
brief popularity of socialist models in the mid-20th century. At the grassroots leVel, the
‘most popular approach to reform has been through politicized Islam, know .

and rejection of secularist tinued frustration of people's economic
and political developmentiled, inf the late 20th century, to militant n in some
sectors. The groups that in terrorist activities in the name.6f Islam have added
yet another set of to those already facing the formerlyigdlonized Muslim world:
the need to gyetgome terrorism as wells the widespregd YiSperception of Ila aa
violent religion. >

as the five Pillars of Islam. The first pillar, as
itis far more than a ritual, requiring commitment
with Islamic values in daly life, it does have certain
ritual expressions. It is part Of the call to prayer (adhan; see below), which is whispered into

the right ear of a , and, ideally, itis the last thing said by a dying person. It is
formally declared tnesses by those converting to Islam.
The second prayer, Salat. Muslims pray five times daily, at times marked by the

position of the'siih: just before dawn, noon, late afternoon, just after sunset, and then
before retiring. can be performed anywhere, but many people prefer to pray in a

that is possible. There is no Sabbath in Islam, but Muslims are supposed to
gather for the noon prayer on Friday in a mosque. Prayers are preceded by expressing the
ingehtion to pray mindfully ~ by reciting the Bismallah: “In the name of God the most
~)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 5 ---
merciful and compassionate.” Then Muslims perform a ritual purification by washing
(wudu) the hands; rinsing the mouth, nose, and head, feet, teeth, and limbs with water. If
no water is available, the wudu can be performed symbolically. In cases of “greater impurity”
(if the person has had sex, sexual discharge, menstrual period, or has given birth), full
ablution (ghus)) is required a complete cleansing including the hair. Prayers are performed
in the direction of the Kaaba in Mecca. Because Muslims are supposed to pray in a clean
environment, it is common for them to pray on a small “prayer rug” (sajada). If none is
available, any other material, even cardboard, is acceptable. Prayers consist of recitation of
specific passages from the Qur'an, repeated in a specified order, and accompanied by
pay ey any eeepc crater im
the floor from a kneeling position). The term “mosque” comes from the Arabic magi
meaning “place of prostration.”

The third pillar of Islam is charity, Zakat. Although not technically a rithal, the giving of
charity has been regularized to an annual donation of 2.5% of the have held
for a year, not counting the person's house. Many Muslims give more charity
than Zakat requires, endowing institutions that serve the as schools and
hospitals.

The fourth pillar is fasting (Sawm) from food, drink, sioking, and sexual activity
sunrise to sunset during the ninth month of Islam's , Ramadan. Families

commonly break the fast together after sunset during Ramadan. Breaking the fast on the
last day of Ramadan is the beginning of a three-day communal celebration (Eid? | a
al-Fitr), when families exchange visits and

‘The fifth pillar of Islam is the pil ENS
performed every year during the first if the Month of Hajj (the last month of Islam's
lunar calendar), but Muslims are yuired to make the Hajj pilgrimage onc® in their
lifetimes, and then only if they'are physically and financially able. However, many Muslims
SS yaeecca a pe
Muslims may make the it ‘to Mecca at any other time of the yea, as well, but it does
On the tenth day of the Month of | ‘Muslims celebrate the
‘most solemn in their calendar, the Eid ae ting Abraham's
willingness to his son to fulfill the will of God. we
pork, eat only meat that has been wughtered and dedicated to God.
¢ is halal - “permitted” — meat; kosher, is also halal.) As we saw in Chapter 4,

interprets the negative attitude’ pork among Jews and Muslims, as

wel as shellfish among some Jews and as a result of their “crossed categories”

is not a function of purity ns, however. Its purpose is to preserve people's clear
reasoning and prevent the! jor that can accompany drunkenness, And like Judaism,
Islam calls for of males, although this is not in the Qur'an. While for Jews
circumcision is a symbol of belonging to the community, for Muslims it is

considered a funétion of purity. (Some communities, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa,
~)

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS


--- Page 6 ---
ae

i

Tat
AAAAAALa

or
RRA ~~ ~~ es

—

FIGURE 6.15 Pilgrims Walking argUnd the Kaaba in Mecca during the Hajj:
ayazad Shutersock images

practice female tircumeision as well - “female genital mutilation” or FGM — but this is not
required by Islam, fior is it practiced only by Muslims.)

The tenth day (Ashura) of Muharram, the first month of the Islamic calendar, is
traditionally @'day of fasting ~ similar to the Jewish Yom Kippur (observed on the tenth day
of thejnew year). For Shi’i Muslims, Ashura iia) day of mourning, commemorating the
martysdom of Imam Hussein, the son of Imam Mii. It is marked by processions of mourners
nd Plays reenacting the suffering of Imam Hussein.

Majo? Divisions Today

Muslims comprise over one-fifth of the world’s population, over 1.5 billion people. Fewer
than one-quarter of\them are Arabs; the largest Muslim populations are in Indonesia,
Pakistan, Bangladesh} and India. Muslims are the second largest religious minority in
Europe, and thé third largest in the United States.

The vast Majority of Muslims — nearly 85% — are Sunni. The second largest branch of
Islam are\the Shi'a (or Shi'ite) Muslims. Shi'a Muslims trace their roots to the early
commitnity who supported Prophet Muhammad's cousin and son-in-law, Ali, as the
leaile¥ of the community when the Prophet died. They believe he was the first legitimate

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 7 ---
successor to the Prophet. Sunni and Shi'a Muslims differ little on matters of belief, except
that Shi’a believe that members of the Prophet's family were endowed with special spiritual
authority, particularly when it comes to understanding how to live in accordance with the
Qur'an’s teachings. They therefore believe that leadership of the community should have
stayed within the Prophet's family, and reject the authority of the first three caliphs chosen
by the Sunnis. They refer to legitimate successors to the Prophet as Imams, and Ali was
the first one.

Shi'a Muslims traced the descendants of the Prophet through a number of generations,
but there were occasional differences of opinion as to who was the rightful Imam. This led
to the three main divisions among Shi'a Muslims. The majority of Shi’a Muslims! i
the legitimacy of twelve generations of Imams, ending in the 9th century, and are
called Twelvers (Ithna Ashari). Twelver Shi’a Muslims comprise the majority of the Irani
population as well as that of Azerbaijan, and smaller majorities in Iraq and/Bahrain. 'sma’il
Shi’a traced the Prophet's lineage through six Imams, but then differed with the majority
over the seventh. The Zaidis recognize the first four Imams, but dif both Twelvers
and Isma'ilis over the fifth. Both Isma’ilis and Zaidis are further divided into smaller groups,
including the Nizari Ismailis, who are led by the Aga Khan. jority of Shi'a Muslims
believe the last Imam, though invisible to human beings, existsin an “occult” form and will
return at the end of time as the Mahdi or messiah. 'as believe in the efficacy of
prayer to God through the intercession of an Imam, a belief rejected by most Sunni Muslims
in favor of prayer directly to God.

All Muslims, whether Sunni or Shi’i, Sufis. Sufi Islam is often
Islamic mysticism, Not all Sufis are tee aera ea 4
personal dimension of Islamic practice. Suis try to cultivate deep and abiding awateness

of the divine, often through io and other spiritual practices. There are many
varieties of Sufi practice, often distinguished by the methods they”use’to develop
spirituality. Some are characteri#ed as more austere, calling for Simplicity, and
solitude, for example, are more “ecstatic” and find miusi¢ and poetry to be
effective npalypeiiaceicivaby The Whiting (technically known
as Mevievis) are for their twirling dance to the 1 beat of drums as a

means to develop spiritual awareness. They trace their origin to the mystic poet and
philosopher Rumi. ~

e)]
0
Unit IV The Impact of Religious Studies

on the Western Monotheisms

We have stressed that learning @religion is quite different from studying religions. The
scholarly study of religion = ‘Studies — has as its goal understanding what religion
is,and how various religiouitfaditions developed, rather than training people ina particular
religion. of the methods and findings of Religious Studies have had an
impact on specific religious traditions, notably Christianity, the religion of so many pioneers
of Religious Studies.

~)

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS

3)

--- Page 8 ---
Biblical Studies

‘We saw in Chapter 3 that the academic study of the Bible started in early modern times with
scholars such as Spinoza. Then in the 19th century, Biblical Studies became more sophisticated
with the method known as Higher Criticism, practiced by people such as William Robertson
Smith. Julius Wellhausen formulated the Documentary Hypothesis, arguing that the first
five books of the Hebrew Bible ~ the “Books of Moses” — were actually compiled from four
independent sources probably well after the time of Moses. This hypothesis was dismissed
by some as an attack on Judaism, but ultimately was accepted — with refinements — by the
majority of scholars.

In the 20th century, archaeological discoveries added new for scholars to
analyze, including documents with particular relevance for Christians. Among the things ‘N
found were the Dead Sea Scrolls and the Nag Hammadi From these documents Y
scholars learned that in the first three centuries of mn era there were many vw
different Christian and Jewish groups with different scripfures and beliefs. It was only in the) ®
4th century that Christian leaders and Jewish certain documents to become)
their official Bibles, their canons. Before that, Ghristians had several other gospels beside)
the now familiar Matthew, Mark, Luke)and Jobh, including the gospels of Thomas, Marj,
Peter, Philip, Judas, and one called the of Truth. a)

Analyzing and comparing all these gospels, scholars saw that they were a spécial kind of
writing. They were not written’ ry books but rather as messages of “Good News” —
Persuasive writings meant to spread various ideas about Jesus, and thereby gain converts.
For the first quarter-centity, messages about Jesus were passed word of mouth.
Different communities istians had different beliefs and ‘different agendas. Some
groups consisted others were mostly non-Jews. (> ¥

‘As we say writings that were eventually included fin the New Testament were
letters written by in the 50s to communities the Mediterranean Sea. Then
around 70 chythe first gospel was written, the Its author had not known
Jesus} , scholars concluded, but composed the Gospel from material that had been

orally for those 40 years. Mark’s is th¢shortest and simplest of the four Gospels.
‘Gospels of Matthew and Luke were next, in the 80s, and they present a lot of

‘same material that is in Mark's ‘of their similarities, the gospels of Mark,
Matthew, and Luke are called the Gospels. Scholars also noticed that the material
reported by Matthew and Luke thai not covered by Mark is similar. That is, Matthew and
Luke report similar “non-Markan” material. That led to the hypothesis that there was once
a document that the authors pf Matthew and Luke both worked from, that no longer exists.
Scholars call it Quelle, the\German word for source, or Q for short.

‘We saw that Judaigm is a tradition that integrates religious scholars’ commentaries on
scripture, generation after generation. And as a practice-based tradition, Judaism does not
place a great deal'of emphasis on theological analysis. However, itis different in Christianity.
‘The realization that the four canonical gospels were neither the only reports on the life of
Jesus, nor Complete ones, prompted theologians such as Rudolf Bultmann to return to the

‘and rethink what can be learned from them.

~)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS
