
--- Page 1 ---
procreation. Funerals reflect Scientologists’ belief that physical life is relatively
unimportant, and that the real person - the thetan — is immortal. As well, Scientologists
may gather at weekly Friday meetings to discuss members’ activities during the week and
any concerns they may have.

Wicca

History and Teachings of Wicca
“Wicca” isthe modern name for witchcraft, in particular the aicient natgR€-based witchcraft
found in the British Isles and France before Christianity arrived. It'is sometimes called
simply “The Craft” or “The Old Religion.” There are a of strains of modern
witchcraft, some referred to as neopagan (a modern|teligigtis movement that traces its
roots to pre-Christian European religion). Because of thei newness and lack of institutional
development, as well as a tendency toward privacy i to avoid widespread prejudice,
there is relatively little scholarly work Craft.” The best known of
movements that call themselves Wicca are with British Traditional
(BTW) - especially Gardnerian and Wicca. Both trace themselves to’
Gardner (4. 1964). Gardner said that he had been initiated into a traditional of
witches in 1939 in the New Fotest region of England, and that they were the inheritors of
the ancienetrdnionage as) {9 Gardner wrote a novel about ieVal witchcraft
'951 he published Witchcraft Today, which describes the
he belonged to. )
rete am glt Gete

called the God. Represented asa man with goa’ head with huge horns, hei lord
Fee eeee
after-death paradise. The Lady and the Lord godtiplement each another, much like male and
forms of Shiva in Hinduism. SomeWiccans consider them aspects of a single god,
‘some consider them the only two gods, some consider them one or two among many gods,
and some consider them symbolicof the cosmic life force. What scholars call the“ontological”
status of gods - whether or not they really exist - is not considered important in Wicca. But
Wiccans do believe that the égsthic forces ~ or the Goddess and the God ~ become incarnate
(take human form) in and priest during Wiccan rituals.
‘The Horned God is al6o the lord of magick, which is the ability to cause change at will.
‘The spelling was by Aleister Crowley (d. 1947), British occult writer and practitioner,
to distinguish this power from the illusions known in popular entertainment as “magic.”
Magickis nobillusory, Wiccans believe. Instead, itis the ability to master the great unseen
(“ of the cosmos through sheer force of will, and command it to do one’s
~a skill achieved by very few practitioners. (Aleister Crowley is not considered a
repfesentative of Wicca, but he did influence Gerald Gardner, with whom he worked at the
~)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS.

--- Page 2 ---
end of his life, and many people involved in contemporary pop culture, such as comic book
writer Alan Moore, horror writer extraordinaire Clive Barker,and musician Ozzy Osbourne.)

There is no rigid doctrine or set of rituals in Wicca. People are free to believe as they
like and engage in whatever rituals they find satisfying. Many groups add to the Lady and
the Lord divinities from Celtic, Greek, or other traditions. Some worship Diana, goddess of
the moon from Greek and Roman religions, or Brigit, the Celtic goddess of fire, poetry,
healing, and childbirth. Beyond the Goddess and the God, Gerald Gardner said, there is a
Prime Mover, also called “The One,” who is unknowable and so not of concern.

Though there are no doctrines in Wicca, five beliefs are common. First, the divine is
imminent in the world, not outside it. Second, humans can interact with the divine asily.
Third, the divine is both female and male. Fourth, after death, people are reincarnatedyAnd
fifth, the natural world is a system of forces that balance each other, which is similar to the
ideas of Taoism (see Chapter 6).

As long as people do not interfere with the happiness of other theylite free to do
what they want. Pleasure, especially sex, is good. A central moral principle is called the
Wiccan Rede (“advice”): An (as long as} it harm none, do what youWill.” This is derived
from Aleister Crowley's motto, “Do what ye will.” Scholars see predecessors to this
sentiment all the way back to the Christian thinker Auguftine, who interpreted the
Gospel of John as a call to “love and do what you will!"¥imWiccan teaching, it is meant to
empower individuals to trust their inner moral sense.

FIGURE 9.10 Callinglthe elements (earth, air, fire, water, and aether) — part of a Wiccan
ritual of handfassiig (marriage). ou! Goppedwww wordreligons co.uk

--- Page 3 ---
Wicca also teaches the Rule of Three (or Law of Threefold Return or Law of Return).
Reflecting what Gerald Gardner called “the joke of witchcraft” known only to witches — that
“she will get three times what she gave,” this rule has been compared to the Golden Rule of
Christianity as well as to the karmic law of reciprocity.

Wiccan Rituals

Unlike most of the traditions we have surveyed, Wicca has no churches or temples. As we
have seen, churches and temples are places considered “sacred,” As one enters them, one
[passes into “sacred space” from space that is not sacred (profane). However, in Wicca, all of
nature is considered sacred. Not surprisingly then, Wicca rituals are hed au natural —in
more ways than one. They are held outdoors, and often the participants are “skyclad’
the buff, bare-naked ~ although, again, in keeping with Wiccan respect for individual
preference, this is not a requirement.

Wiccan rituals involve the casting of spells or “workings” In Roman Catholicism,
sacraments are ritual actions performed by priests who’are believed to effect real changes
through those rituals. Thus, the priest can really change bread and wine into the body and,
blood of Jesus, and can really confer “absolutigh” — divine forgiveness for sins, provi
everything has been done just right. In workings, the priestess can
power of the cosmos to effect healing or protection or a number of other physi
requested by the petitioner. However, spells should be cast for good only, stich is for love
and wisdom. And no magick, eve fo god, shoul be performed on eWwithout their

consent. Casting love spells, for example, to make someone fall in love without her consent
would interfere with her autonomy. \)
Rituals typically begin with summoning the powers of the fou points of the compass

and the five basie,“elements” ~ earth, air, fire, water, and “aethet,” which is considered the
cosmic force that Uinderlies all of nature. Wiccan orientation toward these five points is
aaieced Nps opbol oF the teacinon, the panteig Bisel chject inca Kies

‘ FIGURE 9.11 The Wiccan pentagram.

erence

--- Page 4 ---
Three Wiccan Spells
Love Spell
Take three cords or strings of pleasing pastel colors ~ perhaps pink, red,
and green - and braid them tightly together, Firmly tie a knot near one
end of the braid, thinking of your need for love.
‘Next, tie another knot, and another, until you have tied seven knots. Wear or
carry the cord with you until you find your love.
‘After that, keep the cord in a safe place, or give it to one of the ele’
burning and scattering the ashes in the ocean or in a stream.

Fertility Spell

During your most fertile time (usually two days before, during a
light nine white candles in your bedroom. Place them

With one mind, we call to thee.

With one heart, we long for thee
Childe of Earth, Wind, Fire & Sea,
Into our lives, we welcome thee.

‘Turn to the East, then South, then! ting this incantation each time
do so, Proceed as nature requires. t this spell each of the five nights
intercourse.
ey
Job Spell a Cc
Begin on Sunday. Li ‘or yellow-colored candle and hgBiowing spat
ee Q

scans ond searches lace ferme)»
me, for thy goodness is great. \
in thee is complete, a good job waits fohyme.
is spell three times. Perform thisiritual every day until employment is
|. Instead of “good job,” maybe it
the words to “record deal,” or

(an “athame” or a “boline?” male creativity), a chalice or cup (symbolizing
female creativity), a sti » the pentacle (symbolizing the five powers), and a
wand, a cauldron, canis, and other objects of symbolic value.

The Wiccan, ~ the “Wheel of the Year” — is punctuated with celebrations called
— tied to the seasons of the year. British Traditional Wicca celebrates

—peeememcmne ie

--- Page 5 ---
cight Sabbats, The four “greater Sabbats” correspond to ancient European seasonal festivals.
The fall festival is called Samhain (the Celtic word for “Summer's End”), which Christians
celebrate as Halloween or “All Hallows Evening” In ancient Celtic and Wiccan tradition, this
isthe night when spirits ofthe departed intermingle with the living, Wiccans mark this Sabbat
by inviting the ancestral spirits to join ina celebration in which they express respect for all
creatures, living and dead, especialy relatives and friends. While Samhain is a dark Sabbat, its
opposite is Beltane, the celebration of spring, sometimes called May Day or the Fire Festival.
{Athe halfway point between the spring equinox and summer solstice, this Sabbat is celebrated
with bonfires and maypole dancing, and may involve symbolic or ritual sex (known as the
Great Rite) performed by the priestess and priest. imbolc (or is celebrated at the
first signs of spring, and Lughnasadh (or Lammas) is a'tanyest festa. The four lesser
Sabbats ~ the summer and winter solstice and the spring and fall equinox - may also be
celebrated, as may be each fll moon and new moon.

Like other religions, Wicca also celebrates initiation into th® group and major life events
(rites of passage). Some Wicca traditions recognize levels of initiation, from a
simple member to someone who can found an

‘The Wicca marriage ceremony i called a
together for two years, five yeas, “as long as
comfortable with.

When a child is bor, thee i a ritual lke baptiam called wiccaning, in which baby
is presented to the Goddess andthe God for protection. Respecting childrens Wutonomy,
the parents sey thet they mney ABpMbote not to follow Wicca S

Yeot editions of the Seneca

History and Teachings of the Senéea

‘The five wwe have considered 0 far ine Napter raise not only the question of

what religion” is, but also the question of y there is some essence shared by

all religions. The last “religion” we shall look 3i ~ that of the Seneca, a native American
raises even more questions.

The Seneca were the largest tribe in! the Iroquois Confederacy. Also called the “Six
Nations,” this alliance included, Mohawk, Onondaga, Cayuga, and Tuscarora
tribes. They lived in what is now New York State. As the westernmost tribe in the group, the
Seneca were the “Keepers ofthe Western Door.” Today an estimated 25,000~40,000 Seneca
live on reservations in rk State, in Canada, and in Oklahoma.

As oral cultures, Nations did not have a written constitution. What united them
was The Great Bit | Law received by the spiritual leader Deganawida (Great Peacemaker),
who was helped by the Mohawk leader Hiawatha. Some ideas from this Law were admired
by the founders of the U:S. and incorporated into their Constitution. One version of the
Law begafbwith the words “We, the people, to form a union” - the very words used for the
ULS. C&nstitution. In 1988, the U.S. Congress passed Concurrent Resolution 331 to recognize
thelinfluence of the Six Nations constitution on the foundational documents of the U.S.
~)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 6 ---
FIGURE 9.12 Dancers from the Allegany and Cattaraugus Reservations of the Seneca Nation
of Indians perform at St. Bonaventure University’s first Native American Heritage Celebration
in 2008. Photo

‘The Seneca lived in longhouses, wood-framed structures covered in elm batk) up to
100 feet in length, which housed tip to 60 people. They had a matrilineal social structure,
that is, membership in the group was passed on through the mothers, Méw hunted and
served as tribal chiefs, making trade agreements and conducting wars, BUt women were
in charge of farming and'property. They owned the land and the hojties, and they chose
the men who séryed on ¢fibal councils. While today people Jive in houses and the
longhouse is used mainly for tribal meetings and ceremonies, thé position of women in
tribal society remaips strong and both group identity and property ownership are passed
on through méthérs.

If we were to travel back in time four centuries to.a Seneca village and ask someone there,
“What is your religion?” not only could that question not be answered - it could hardly be
translaféd. As we saw in Chapter 5, one feature of oral cultures is that they do not distinguish
“religion” from “politics” or “culture.” Senéca beliefs, customs, and rituals that others might
call “religious” were continuous with Senéca storytelling, art, music, politics, agriculture,
medicine, history, etc. There was no séParate part of of life called “religion.”

Like other North American natiyé traditions, too, and like oral cultures around the world,
the Seneca showed animism and anthropomorphism in the way they described the world
around them. That is, theyjtended to see everything as alive, and they tended to think of
living things as like human beings. For example, they called their most important crops ~
corn, beans, and squish - “The Three Sisters.” The sun was “Elder Brother” and the thunder
“Grandfather.” When they visited the huge waterfall called “Nee-ah-gah-rah’ (Niagara),

ZOROASTRIANISM, SHINTO, BAHA', SCIENTOLOGY, WICCA, AND SENECA TRADITIONS

--- Page 7 ---
Patriarchy and Matriarchy

Since the early days of modernity, scholars have analyzed the nature and
‘origins of male dominance in human society. itis dearly reflected in historical
religions, particularly those that developed in settled societies and have
written records. Official interpretations of the biblical and Quranic stories

of Adam and Eve are often used to explain that women are weaker than men, both

physically and morally, and therefore need to be protected and controlled by men.

Male dominance is also institutionalized in most regions. It is Gn in recent years

that women have been eligible for positions of authority inmost ‘groups.

However, some scholars have wondered if patriarchy is indeed dictated by
nature or a function of specific socioeconomic di in history. Among

the earliest to question male control of females rich Engels (4. 1895),

Karl Marx's collaborator. Engels saw patriarchy @§ 2 result of the dominant

position gained by warriors when human bei the transition from the

nomadic life of hunters and shepherds to the settled life of farmers whose land
and crops were the source of survival and widely coveted.
Many contemporary scholars t patriarchy is not an essential

life but something that simply developed and has been kept in place by institutions.
Gerda Lerner (b. 1920) organized religions as the institut fon of
patriarchy in her landmark TéiCreation of Patriarchy (1987). Is see
ing dtived its usefulness. Correlated with'the prevalence

with more

re the human

Give Women a Future (2001). There is

that non-patriarchal societies are not

are not matriarchal); rather, they are

‘or property are passed on through mothers) or

matrilocal (meaning that pon marriage a couple becomes part of the bride's
extended family in the groom's).

meaning ‘Waters, they heard its roar as the voice of the Spirit of the Waters.

In additiotsto the spits in such natural forces, animals, and plants, the Seneca also believed

ina .g0d, sometimes called the Great Spirit or Great Mystery, who created the world,
people how to live, and watches over all creation.

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 8 ---
Chief Red Jacket’s Response to Christian
Missionaries

FIGURE 9.13 Portrait of Red Jacket by John Lee
Mathies, oil on canvas, 1828. Memes At Galley
of the Unweruty of Rochester lent by the estare of

Joba W. Brown

In 1822, Red Jacket, Chief of the Seneca, called a council in Batavia, New York.
Here are some of his comments there about the attempts 6f Christian missionaries
to convert the native tribes:

When the Great Good Spirit made the world, he put in it the trees of the forests,
the birds of the air all kinds of animals, ain fishes that live in the waters. To all
these he gave their respective shapes, cojors, natures, actions, etc.... Those aré
all fixed, you see, and are immovable. They cannot change colour, nature or
their actions or customs. He also af'the same time made the White Mani the
Red Man, and the Bla¢k Manl¥6'the White Man he gave one way to Wosship
him and certain custoffisito the Red Man another, and his customsiand way to
live; and to the Black Man others stil. Now | say we can't changed religion or
custom, because theyre fixed by the Great Good Spirit, and'f We attempt to
do it, we shall offend our Great Spirit and he will punish Us fér it.

Fromithe rising to the setting sun examine all theidifferent tribes of Indians,
2nd seélif’what a condition you find them, | have travelled far. | have been
from the Atlantic to the shores of the Pacifig, and | know the habits, customs
and situation of almost every tribe and nation of Indians. And | say that it is
3 fact, that whenever you find a tribe oPindians that have been Christianized
and have changed their customiofihabit, which the Great Good Spirit gave
them, you will see that they aré\s"boor, worthless, ling, ragged, miserable
and degraded set of beings... say, therefore, that the Great Spirit will not
suffer his Red Children tO\change their religion or custom... It is not because
the White Men love the Indians that they want to make them Christians, it is
because they want fo cheat them out of their property. The Black Coats
{missionaries} tht they send among us with honey on their tongue, have
always proved themselves to be dishonest; they are an ignorant, idle set of
creatures! incapable of getting a living amongst their White brethren, and
are thefefore sent amongst us to get a living. They bring along with them a
worthless set of White Men who steal our horses and seduce our Squaws.


--- Page 9 ---
Although the Great Spirit of the Seneca is similar to the God of the Bible, the Europeans
who came to North America often treated the indigenous peoples (Native Americans or
“Indians”) as “heathens” (people from the “heath” -lands covered with shrubs that were
uncultivated, in the literal sense of not being farmed) and their beliefs and rituals as
“paganism?” (see p. 277). The Iroquois tribes had a ritual of sacrificing a maiden to Nee-ah-
gah-rah, for example, They put her in a white canoe decorated with flowers and fruit and
pushed it over the falls. European missionaries condemned this sacrifice as barbaric and
tried to replace such traditions with Christian beliefs and rituals. However, some of the
native people asked the missionaries about the death of Jesus on the cross, which Catholics
reenact — indeed “celebrate” — in the Sacrifice of the Mass. Wasn't that killing meant to
please God, they asked. And if that sacrifice of a young min, was good, then why is our
sacrifice of a young woman bad?

Seneca Rituals Y

Unlike traditions with writing, Seneca tradi passed down orally. They are
expressed mostly in stories and rituals, not or “teachings.” If we assume th
categories used in Christianity, we can talk ‘Seneca beliefs,” but this is not the

the Seneca traditionally talked about thought and did. They the
world to be controlled by many spirits, the greatest being the Creator that Chief Red
Jacket called the “Great Good Spirit.” However, this understanding of the world is not

called “belief” as disti knowledge” ~ something that Gan be proven.
Instead, as in many understandings ofthe world afebetter thought of
as a worldview. S

The lives of the istorically depended on the crops they grew and the animals
they hunted, they were attuned to the four seasons. Each year they had six major
festivals in, whi thanked the Great Spirit for the plants and animals they ate, and

asked the Great Sprit for continued blessings: y

© Midwinter or New Year's Festival, lasting nine 4a in January or February.
. ‘to-the-Maple Festival, late ‘March. As the sap began to rise in
trees, they gave thanks to the Spirit for the gift of the maple, and to the

the Thunders” to bring/rain on the crops, and “Our Elder Brother the Sun” to not burn
the young plants as they €merge from the ground.

© Strawberry Festiva} in June. This was a “first-fruits” ritual thanking the Great Spirit for
the earliest crop 6f the season.

© Green lasting four days, in late August or September. The Seneca thanked
the that the crops had ripened.

‘©. Hatyest Festival in October. As the corn was picked, dried, and stored for winter, the
Seiieca thanked the Great Spirit for another year’s harvest.

=)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

a

4

Y

--- Page 10 ---
‘The Midwinter Festival is till very popular. Its format varies from tribe to tribe, but all
have the same essential components. The general theme of the festival is to honor the Great
Spirit, thank him for the blessings of the past year, and ask him to bless the people with
another fruitful year. On the first day, there is a public naming of the babies that have been
born since the last Green Corn Festival. The second day begins with the Big Heads, two men
dressed in bearskin coats and masks made of cornhusks, waking people up and announcing
that the new year has begun. The Big Heads call the people to the council house (the
building where special tribal meetings are held) or the longhouse to reveal their dreams,
and warn that if they do not come they will be obsessed by the desires that caused the
dream. On the third day, called Ashes Stirring, small groups of people visit the in the
Village to stir the ashes in the hearth as a symbol of thanks for the blessings of the
year. Then they return to the council house or longhouse to sing songs of thanksgiving.

The fourth day is for rituals of the special medicine societies, such
Society, the Buffalo Society, and the Otter Society. They perform heali
people. On the fifth day, the main ritual used to be the burning of a
sacrifice to the Creator. Earlier it had been strangled (no blood.
decorated with beads and ribbons, had been hung on a
a white basket is substituted for the dog. After the, sacri
performed.

The Origin GC False Face Society oS”
There are many. ®f the origin of the healing powels Bf the
medicine menafithe False Face Society. According to one short version:

The Spirit icine Man, a man blessed with
fesponse to his love of living things, met a str
contest... [see] who could move a mountain.
jin quake. The Medicine Man said that
Skills, BURFot enough to move a mountain,

in, but so suddenly it hit the and left him disfigured.
Spirit Medicine Man healed him ight him the ways of medicine.
fe stranger became a very famous héaler knows as “Old Broken Nose.”
(httpuzwew support native-amerigah-art.comviroquois-masks htm)

Six Nation traditions explain that the stranger then went to live in the forest.
his power when needed. Those initiated into
to be inspired by Old Broken Nose’s spirit,

mmremoenmmonee |
