
--- Page 1 ---
FIGURE 5.8 Image from a cave in Ariége, France, of ann
stag, painted and engraved about 13,000 st. ve Wat

AcrweNany Y”

Ancient, Traditions, Oral Traditionsyand Religion

Do the similarities between some of the elements of prehistoric societies just discussed and
whatwe call religion today justify the claim thavahey are early forms of religion? As we have
seen, §¢Kolars who hold an evolutionary view of religion believe so. They think that what we
recognize as religious activities arose in bands or tribes of hunter-gatherers long before the
development of writing. These ancient’ of ours were concerned with the animals
they hunted for food, and with the predators that hunted them. They were concerned with
death and sometimes marked it with rituals. They were also concerned with birth because
it replenished their numbers, 8o the fertility of their women was important. They tended to
think animistcally and aithfopomorphicaly: that is, they thought of moving things as
alive and like themselves

If we look at th people today who are the most similar to humans in the Upper
Paleolithic age, we'can see all these features in their cultures. There are still hunter-gatherer

“)

EARLY TRADITIONS

--- Page 2 ---
FIGURE 5.9 Photo ofishayfan. Library of Congress.

tribes living in South Ameriea, Australia, and Africa. Like humans before agriculture, their
lives depend on killing preyrand on not being killed by predators. So rituals connected with
hunting and avoiding pfédators are prominent. Human death is a major concern, so they
mark it with ritualsL tke early human groups, too, these tribes are small, and so the fertility
of their womens essential. They think animistically and anthropomorphically, too,
describing rivers and volcanoes, for example, as living things, and attributing human
thoughts and motives to animals. While today’s oral hunter-gatherer cultures cannot be
assumed to have all the same features as the first tribal cultures had, they may help us
understand some of the ways that early humans thought and acted.

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD REUGIONS

--- Page 3 ---
Common Features of Oral Cultures

© The survival of the tribe is the main value.

‘© Human fertility is important.
© Animals and plants are central.
© Rites of passage mark lfe-transitions — birth, puberty, marriage, death.
Thinking tends toward animism and anthropomorphism..
They have no word or concept “religion.” Y
There is no distinction between religion and politics.

The leader may be religious, political, and medical.

Each tradition is local; there is no expectation that other Ware
their beliefs and rituals.

There is no distinction between literal uses of langu one hand,
and metaphors and other non-lteral uses of languat

There is no doctrine,

There is no distinction between natural and supernatural.

Knowledge is stored in proverbs — remember sayings.

Dreams and visions are considered sout of knowledge.

»

a
For example, the absence of Writing in non-literate societies today that there are
no birth certificates, age licenses, or other records of lit So in order to
have people remember i t events, those events are by public rituals.

Memorable. announce to the tribe that a baby has.
has become’an adult, that two people have married, and:
call these. ins from one life-stage to anothen,fiteé of passage. It is reasonable
to it early humans would also have rites of passage as a way of

jing and remembering important people's lives.

ier feature of oral tribal traditi is that they are local. There are no

traditions for the whole world. No one the tribe on the other side of the river to tell
the same stories and perform the same tituals as they do. Conversely, everyone who is in the
tribe is “in the tradition.” There “non-believers;” to not participate in the rituals
would be to leave the community, Without writing, there are also no official teachings and
so no orthodox beliefs, or hi beliefs; there is simply belonging to the community or
not belonging to it. (As we'paw in Chapter 3, pioneer sociologist Emile Durkheim focused
on community as important factor in ns, both ancient and modern.)
All these features ofjoral tribal traditions today may well have characterized our early
ancestors. But doés either set of traditions represent religion?

0

the group, that a child
ne has died. Scholars

EARLY TRADITIONS

--- Page 4 ---
Why not just describe both sets of traditions simply as typical of oral cultures?
Literature scholar Walter Ong’s groundbreaking book Orality and Literacy: The
Technologizing of the Word (2002) outlines the characteristics of oral societies. They
include a number of characteristics we have seen in these ancient traditions, such as the
tendency to think practically rather than abstractly — to view things in terms of their use
rather than some intellectual category; to view life as a seamless whole rather than in
distinct segments such as “political” “economic,” or religious; and to store and transmit
knowledge in proverbs.

‘Whether “religious” or simply “oral? the relative simplicity of early hunter-gatherer
cultures would change drastically when humans settled down to anlagricultural way of life.
‘And many of those changes are reflected in the traditions we identify ag¥éligious.

of Historic jons

Around 12,000 ace, some humans figured out bw to produce crops year after year:
same place, rather than having to wander} looking for food. This first hay
‘Mesopotamia, the land between the Tigris River and the Euphrates River in now
Iraq, The frst plants grown Mlerope were grains: bale, then whest, rye, af¥ice. From
le setled in places suitable for farming and herding
‘called the-Neolithic (“New Stone”) Revolution.”
‘With crops planted in the same felds each year, people had to comsbl access to this land
and protect it from They claimed ownership rights to spécific plots of land and,
because there were frequent disputes about who had the rights'to which property, men’s
sre ees hae the th
(COld Stone”) times. While hunter-gatherers had lived in tribes of twenty to
made possible villages of hi ‘and then cities of thousands. The
Chote bane phere ee wea not et et tbove hi rates bt grog
es was. And the king was usually'the Ypan who had led warriors successfully in
control of their group's territories. His leadership was linked not just to his
military skills but to his ownership of land and stores of food, since these were what induced
people to be loyal to him.
‘Those who lost battles often béeame slaves of the winners. These slaves included not just
the losing warriors, but thei women and children, too. So now aggressive men owned not
only land, but people. vy often took female captives as their concubines (slaves with
whom they had sex offspring they could claim as their rightful heirs) or wives.
From there it was an easy step to thinking that a man owns not only his land but his wife
and children, along with his slaves. Thus, according to many scholars, patriarchy — rule by
strong father — became a common pattern.
As hy became part of societies after the Neolithic Revolution, it also characterized
‘what Would come to be called religions. Instead of venerating fertility goddesses and wild
.

The Neolithic Revolu npr the Rise

~~

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD REUGIONS

--- Page 5 ---
animals, as Paleolithic peoples had done, Neolithic peoples came to picture their
just as the strongest fortresses were located on high ground where it is possible to see what
your enemies are doing, so the gods were thought to live at the highest level of all - in the
sky, “the heavens.” The goddesses associated with fertility receded in importance. A new
kind of fertility became important ~ fertility of the land — and new gods emerged
representing that fertility. And both kinds of fertility deity were perceived as subservient to
the dominant warrior gods.

The transitions in the stature of gods and goddesses sometimes were described in
dramatic terms. For example, in Greek mythology, Zeus was the king of the
ruler of Mount Olympus, and the god of the sky whose weapon was lightning. But he
was not always so powerful. Zeus was the youngest child of the Titans, Cronus and Rhea,
both children of the earth, Gaea. But Cronus, the king of the Le as ‘told that

he would be overthrown by his son, just as he had overthrown his own father. In order
to prevent this, he swallowed each of his children as they were bor became tired
of losing her children this way, so before the last one was ped up a rock

and handed this to Cronus, pretending it was the baby. Swallowed it and Zeus
was saved. When he grew up, Zeus forced his father to vomit fp his siblings. His brothers
were so grateful that they let him have control of and the thunderbolt. The
siblings then did battle with the Titans, banishing them to the underworld — except for
Atlas, who was punished for fighting Zeus by having to hold up the sky. Then Zeus and? ” °

””

Social Revolutiéns Reflected in Myth”
Cain and Hephaestus as Villains o

Above we sal'the story of Cain and Abel as an, le of sacrifices
beinglaccepted or rejected by gods. Scholars also Sen the story of Cain
and reflection of the conflict between and farmers. When
people of land so that they can rai shepherds find their
lands reduced and their livelihood . In the biblica/Qur’anic

istory, Cain's offering was grain; he was a fatmér. Abel’s offering was an animal;
sa shepherd. Cain is depicted as the @uil one. He became so angry that he
his brother ~ showing that the Story is told from the viewpoint of the
nomadic shepherds, which, of cous, the ancient Hebrews were. This was an
ancient range war — like those the farmers and cattlemen in the Old
West of the United States, Negative depictions of blacksmith gods ~ such as

of a nomadic culture i
developed smithi

EARLY TRADITIONS

--- Page 6 ---
his brothers Poseidon and Hades drew lots for the rest of the world - Poseidon got the
waters and Hades got control of the underworld. Zeus then set about marrying his
sisters, putting them under his control. But one of them refused him. There are many
versions of Greek mythology, but according to one popular version, Hera conceived a
son all by herself, just to spite Zeus. Zeus was so angry that when the child was born, he
threw him into the sea from the top of Mount Olympus, crippling him. There (or on an
island, according to some versions) the son, Hephaestus, became a master blacksmith
and submissive servant of Zeus. Later, when Zeus was outraged by men (this was before
there were women) because they had collaborated with the Titan Prometheus, he
commissioned Hephaestus to fashion the worst possible box that when
opened, released Pandora, described as “woman, that Curse from Which men would
never escape.”

‘The characterization of women as treacherous, devious; and conniving is common in
traditions after the Neolithic revolution. Often, in factywe find the character of goddesses

transformed, from benignly powerful to jealous and ~ and powerful. That is what
happened to Hera, the sister and wife of Zeus who defied him. The Indian goddess Kali
(as we shall see in Chapter 7) is another example ~ éften depicted with blood and corpses,
or body parts around her, she is associated wit and destruction, unpredictable
to be feared. The unreliability of females, the field clear for males to

Indeed, the idea of dominating became central in many ancient traditions. In the
Bible, for instance, Yahweh is described as “Lord of Hosts (Armies),” and aa Super-king
ruling over the whole world. Y ~

In ancient Mesopotamia, the afl asshole pea Mee a te top
society. The farmers, and slaves were at the bottom. The king's authority was
legitimated by the confirmed that he spoke with theaulthority of the gods. To
allow the leadersto rise even closer to the gods, step-pyramids-talled ziggurats were built.
Scholars believe rittals were performed at shrines at the top’of these monuments.

Not far West and south of Mesopotamia was Egyptyaid it also developed a patriarchal
ilture after the Neolithic Revolution, along the Nile River. Ancient Egypt had about 700
gods aind goddesses, but — as is typical for Neolithic societies — the gods dominated. The
Egyptian leaders went further than Mesopotamiian rulers, declaring that the Pharaoh - the
< was a god. He was associated with Hofus, the son of the sun god Ra.

‘Asa god himself, of course, the pharadh wielded great power. A later Egyptian tradition
‘even said that at death the Osiris, a god who was in charge of life after
death. Obviously, this would be someone to stay on good terms with. Egyptian ideas about
the afterlife changed over tite, but constant was the belief that the body had to be preserved

for the person to live th. This is why the Egyptians developed the art of turning
corpses into mummi pharaoh’s mummy was shown further respect by being
‘entombed in a pyfamid.

Mesopotamia, ind Egypt were not the only places where civilizations developed
after the Nedlithic Revolution. The Indus River Valley in southwest Asia and the Yellow
River in China were two more. In the next three chapters we shall see how seven
religidgs traditions developed in these places ~ the seven commonly called “world
religins” by scholars. From the ancient Middle East came Judaism, Christianity, and
)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD REUGIONS

--- Page 7 ---
The Divine Right of Kings - an Early Version

FIGURE 5.10 Wall carving from the
Temple of Horus at Edfu in Egypt. © ute
DarieuStockonoto,

The idea that rulers get their powee from gods is an ancient one. ln
carving from the Temple Edfu in Egypt, two goddesses
i ov by combining their individual, The
7 and 57 sc uring the Polemaic pr.

fertility, no doubt in order to assure the group's

animals and other natural forces, seeing

called supernatural powers or gods. They may also have

lieved it possible junicate with and encourage such powers to help their group,
by offering gifts (Sacrifices) and compliments (worship) and then making requests
fe eS ee es

EARLY TRADITIONS a


--- Page 8 ---
than others. They may even have believed that some individuals can channel the supernatural
power and so perform extraordinary feats such as healing. In other words, they may have
had priests or shamans. As well, they seem to have marked life-transitions, especially the
death of members of the group.

However, we have no evidence that our prehistoric ancestors recognized a fundamental
distinction between what we call the supernatural and the natural. Nor do we find evidence
that they distinguished sharply between various spheres of daily tribal life such as political,
economic, public, and private ~ much less religious and non-religious.

‘What we call “religion” today seems to be more specific and more complex than either what
the first humans did or what oral tribes today do. Religion seems\= at the very least ~ to
distinguish between parts of life that are within its realm and parts of are outside its
realm. To use the language of many of the thinkers in Part I, religion Seems to distinguish
between the sacred and the profane, or the sacred and the ‘parts: (“Secular” refers
to the things of everyday life, the things that exist “in time’ as from the timeless
or “eternal” realm of divinity.) In the next chapter we sh the traditions in which that

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 7 *)

1. Do yu ee evidence of ifitim end sahopomorphism fn modem Wet Rp t
how we name ships and hurticanes, for example.

2 pt i nna hi sn en
ghosts compatible with this

3. Among early Biman beflgs, death rituals sem to have invabyphe belief chat dying is
going to another that is much like this one. What would the religions that you
‘know say/abouitthat idea? Y

4. After the Neolithic Revolution, many scholars think, thé control of land became
important)iind so there was an emphasis on war abd conquest. Do you see any

of this in the religions that you know?

5. After war and conquest became im] / group survival, warriors - typically
fale - became dominant in many Do you see a correlation between the
importance of war and the of women?
6. Do you think that the: tus of males is inevitable in society?

7. Unlike early humans, few ofjus are hunters. But animals still seem important in our
lives and in our thought, Can you think of examples? Are there any examples of things
that are part animal/patt human in modern thought?

\
-

REFERENCES

Sigmund Pretid, The Future of an Illusion. Eastford, CT: Martino Fine Books, 2010.
Walter Oitg, Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word. London: Routledge, 2nd ed., 2002.

+

)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD REUGIONS

--- Page 9 ---
FURTHER READING

Pascal Boyer, Religion Explained. New York: Basic, 2002.

H, and HLA. Frankfurt and John A. Wilson, Before Philosophy: The Intellectual Adventure of Ancient
Man. Harmondsworth: 1967.

noes The Loic of Writing andthe Orpnization of Soe. Cambridge: Cambridge University

cre ‘Hamilton, Mythology. New York: Back Bay, 1998.

Gerda Lerner, The Creation of Patriarchy, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997.

EARLY TRADITIONS


--- Page 10 ---
THE FAMILY OF WESTERN
MONOTHEISMS

Jewish, Christian, and Islamic Traditions

‘Tm callingit Genesis.’ It's part of a five-book contract.”

FIGURE 6.1 Morigi¥berg 1998/The New Yorker Collectionwwcartoonbaniccom

