
--- Page 1 ---
The Woman's Bible

Half a century after the pioneering Women’s Rights Convention of 1848,
which she helped lead, Elizabeth Cady Stanton and several colleagues
wrote The Woman's Bible, a set of commentaries on the Bible that prefigure
many ideas of contemporary feminists. The introduction stated that:
From the inauguration of the movernent for woman's emancipation the Bible
‘has been used to hold her in the “divinely ordained sphere,” prescribed in
Old and New Testaments. The canon and civil law; church and state priests
legislators; all political parties and religious denominations have alike

However, if we read the Bible without sexist assumptions) Stant
interpret it as saying that the feminine is as important as.

God includes both. The following section of The 's Bible presents the
story of the creation of man and woman in cer}: 2950, and wer oa
that God is female as well as male:

And God said, Let us make man in olinimage, after our likeness: and let them
have dominion over the fish of the ‘over the fow of the air, and over
the cattle, and over all the earthjand ofer every creeping thing that
upon the earth. And God. 1 in his own image, in the image
im; le created he them. And God
them: and God 7m, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenisH the
earth, and subdue dominion over the fish of the séa, shd over
‘over every living thing that moveth Upon the earth.
historian’s first account of the woman; @
6. Vt is evident from
J, and that the
|. Scott in his
is the origin of the
le personages, as generally

The first step in the elevation, to her true position, as an equal
factor in human progress, is vation of the religious sentiment in
regard to her dignity and , the recognition by the rising generation of
an ideal Heavenly Mi whom their prayers should be addressed, as
well as to a Father. Iflariguage has any meaning, we have in these texts a
plain deciaration ofthe existence of the feminine element in the godhead,

glory with the masculine, The Heavenly Mother and

‘man in his own image, male and female.” Thus

Scripturg)63 well as science and philosophy, deciares the eternity and
equality of sex. (httpy/www.sacred-texts.comwmnwb/)


--- Page 2 ---
abolition of slavery, and to other issues of social justice, Elizabeth Cady Stanton led a group
that published The Woman's Bible in 1895. Susan B. Anthony and others worked tirelessly to
{get women the right to vote. It took seventy years and an amendment to the Constitution
before American women were allowed to vote, but the modern feminist movement
had begun.

‘Today there are many approaches to feminism, making the term difficult to define. We
shall use the broadest possible description, provided by essayist and broadcaster David
Bouchier: “Any form of opposition to any form of social, personal, or economic
discrimination which women suffer because of their sex.” (Bouchier 1983,2) The movement
is complex, however. Like Liberation Theology, it has a descriptivelside and a prescriptive
side: it describes how things are, and it prescribes how things be. While some
contend that the academic study of anything should be limited to describing it, when
something involves issues of social justice, it is hard to just describe what has happened
without commenting on how things should change. That is Sbvious in studies of slavery,
racism, and anti-Semitism, for example, and it is true of feminist studies as well.

In the 1970s a new wave of feminism gained support from women and men,
and led to the creation of Women's Studies
art, history, philosophy, and Religious.

Of all the institutions that sustain sexism (discrimination in favor of one gender over
others, characteristic of patriarchy), religions are among the most prominent, Bven today,
some Orthodox Jewish men say a traditional prayer thanking God that “not born
woman.” Jews, Christians, and Musli see sca ae Universe and
the Creator of “man.” In ity, God and Jesus are Father and\S6n. The early leaders
of the Church are still called the Fathers. Priests are called “Faghier”” too, and “Pope” is
English fos=Papas Discrimination against women in Maslin tes is widely publiciaed
in the West.

While PC. ee
‘abandon theif religion, others say that sexism is got part of the core message of their

and so they try to reform them. Liberation Theology as such is not widely

in Judaism, mainly because J is worked out in legal commentary
than in theological discussion. in the case of feminist issues, scholars from
across the the traditions find it go back to core theological formulations derived

from scripture. We shall look at

Judith Plaskow (b. 1947)

Judith Plaskow received .D. from Yale Divinity School, writing a dissertation that was
later published as and Grace: Women's Experience and the Theologies of Reinhold
Niebuhr and Paul Gjllich. She has taught at Manhattan College since 1979. In 1972 she
became the fledgling Women and Religion Group of the American Academy
of Religion, Tp 1981 she helped start the pioneering Jewish feminist group B'not Esh. She
was of the Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion and served as co-editor from
1983-1994. In 1997-1998 she was President of the American Academy of Religion. With
Caféi’ Christ, Plaskow edited the groundbreaking anthology Womanspirit Rising (1979).
S)

from all three of the Western monotheisms.

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 3 ---
With Elisabeth Schussler-Fiorenza, she edited The Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion.
Over a long and distinguished career, she has offered a feminist perspective on her own

Plaskow's earliest work, The Coming of Lilith (1972), rewrites an ancient midrash
imaginative story based on the Bible) about Eve and Adam's other wife, Lilith. In the story,
Lilith isa rebellious outcast. However, when she meets Eve, they become friends, explore the
sexism in the world as God has set it up, and think of ways to transform that world. Plaskow’s
1982 article “The Right Question Is Theological” argues that halakhah, the laws of Judaism,
are part of a patriarchal system, a system ruled by men, Those who want to eliminate sexism
from Judaism, she says, should reform Jewish theology rather than waste time tryi
reform halakhah.

Inher masterwork, Standing Again at Sinai (1990), Plaskow points out that the story of
Moses receiving the law from God ~ the central event in Judaism ~ doe not involve any

acceptable. In her chapter. on ‘she argues that Jewish scripture and-history have
overlooked much of women’s experiences. She is less negative than halakhah,
seeing law as a necessary part of all human cultures. However, she argues that Jews need to
re-think the way that laws afe made and interpreted. “Perhaps what distinguishes feminist
Judaism from: rabbinic Judaism,” she says, “is not so myth the absence of rules from
the former as a conception of rule-making as a shared process.” (Plaskow 1991, 71)
‘The chapter: sketches the creation of a society in which Jewish women are equal.
Again at Sinai also has a chapter on) of sexuality. For Plaskow,
ty ig not a minor detail about a person of his or her identity. The world that
each of is experiences is body mediated, so being human is being sexual as well as
being rational. Becoming aware of how experience is mediated through a body, she says,
willhelp usto createa holy attitude ity, to replace traditional male domination.
‘A new sexual ethics will emerge in which sexual relationships are based not on ownership
or hierarchy but on empowerment 6f each other.

Rosemary Radford: (b. 1936)

Rosemary Radford was @ducated in philosophy, history, and classics, and she has taught in

the theology progratts of several seminaries and universities Inher landmark book Sexism

and God- Talk, she'explores how traditional language about God has kept men in control of
~)

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS

--- Page 4 ---
the Western religious traditions. For thousands of
years people have talked about God as “Father,”
“King.” and “Lord of Hosts” (Commander of
Armies). These words, Ruether says, create an image
of God that valorizes fathers over mothers, kings
over ordinary people, and warriors over peaceful
people. “The God-image serves as the central
reinforcement of patriarchal rule.” Just as God rules
the universe, men rule the earth, They give the orders;
women and children obey. Inithe home, the father is
the ultimate authority In the ¢lfurch, synagogue,
mosque, and temple, men interpret the scriptures,
conduct the rituals, atid manage the finances.
‘Complementing God a8 a militarist king and “men”
as made in his image are scripture’s passive female role
models. Ruéther tes that women in the Bible are
important only because of their relationship to some,
‘man, not fr what they are in themselves. She points
outithapth the Bible God speaks directly only to tien.
Women's access to God is through their husbands or
fathers. In Christian scripture the ultimatt’female is
‘Mary, the mother of Jesus. She is praitednot for what
FIGURE 6.20 Rosemary Radford Ruether. Used with she does or thinks, but for what sheets happen to her ~
ermiasion of Pace School of Religion becoming pregnant with Jesus Sand for what she does
not do — have sex. Her greatness is that she does what
God and Jesus teliher to do. Church leaders for centuries haye held Mary up as the role model
for women, an incefitive for women to go along with what més want them to think and do.

Howevetyagain, this does not make the Bible wrong Of misguided. If we probe beneath
the\sexist language and ideas in the Bible, Ruether says, we can see that the core message is
not atiall sexist. Sexist language is geared to the Sotial realities at the time of revelation, but
it is not prescriptive. It does not mean that sotiety should always be patriarchal. A basic
Biblical theme is social justice for everyontsdnd the liberation of oppressed people. This is
the point of God’s freeing the Israelites from slavery in Egypt. This is what prophets such as
‘Amos are talking about when they. protest the mistreatment of widows and orphans. And
liberation was the essential feature of the idea of the Messiah.

Not only is sexism extrafteobs to the original message of the Bible, Ruether says, but it
conflicts with what the New Testament says about Jesus. The Gospels portray a man
remarkably free of sexi8ih, who speaks to women as equals, has women as friends, and
rejects the militari ind hierarchy in his culture.

In order to Fettirn to the original message that was meant to liberate both women and
men fron oppression, Ruether says, we must understand how religious traditions develop.
‘They startyshe says, when a group of people have a revelatory experience ~ when they see a
new dimension of reality, a new meaning in life, or a new way of living. Next they describe
thelt Experience, using the words and concepts available in their culture. Within the group,


--- Page 5 ---
leaders emerge who claim authority in expressing and interpreting the revelatory experience,
and their interpretations become the central message of the group. For example, the leaders
ofthe ancient lsacltes captured their revelatory experience inthe writings now known as
the Bible.

A the religion grows, each generation applies the central message to its lives, and passes
iton tothe next generation, Sometimes, however, one generation determines that its leaders
are corrupt and no longer acting for the best interest of the group. This happened, for
example, when Martin Luther accused the leaders of the Roman Catholic Church of being
concerned more with their own power and wealth than withthe people they were leading,
If the challengers make their case well, they can bring about a paradigm shift, a new way of
thinking about the group and its message. This is what happened ithe
Reformation, Ruether says, and has recently happened in Christianity and other religions as
feminists, both women and men, have challenged patriarchy.

‘The original revelatory experience of the Bible was interpreted and regBfded by men.
‘They experienced transcendent reality, or divinity, and described it a§ the greatest thing

they could think of, In their patriarchal culture, the greatest ing had to be male.
Also, landowners and rulers were a higher kind of being than landless peasants. Lords and
kings, who gave orders, were obviously superior to the followed those orders.
So God had to be not just male but Lord and King. this way, the writers of the

Bible described the divine as a male who, as the King of the Universe, controls everything

Many people now reject the idea that is the natural form of government, that
males are naturally superior to is
following codes rete ags © out of concern for other people,

‘We must reinterpret the Bible, Ruether says, to create “an “of God beyond
patriarchy.” If we want tOluse a parent image to talk about God,, “Mother” is as
appropriate as “Father.” r We may want to get rid of all parént metaphors because
they promote infantilism.” That is, they make ad themselves and other
adults as children. ers y pe
seen as and femaleness.”

In a new feminist theology, Ruether says.that we should open our minds and
nds = oj ond Chin istian doctrines, but marginalized
and theologies, as well as philosophies. She also wants to avoid
“humanocentric” thinking, and consider the Values of the animals and plants on this planet.
After all, humans are latecomers on Eaeth, and our galaxy has 1,000,000,000 stars, so it is
highly unlikely that everything exists for us. And even if it does, we should probably take
care oft, rather than destroy i fgough wanton consumerism and warfare.

Amina Wadud (b, 1952)

practice-besed 20 discussion of teachings is generally carried out in the context of

legal studies: In hie Case of teachings about women, this is very appropriate, since the status
S

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS

