
--- Page 1 ---
‘cx, “nothing comes out more clearly than that the mass of the people found the greatest
difficulty in keeping their national religion distinct from that of the surrounding nations.”
(Smith 1923, 5) As we shall see in Chapter 6, Solomon was famous for building the Temple
to Yahweh in Jerusalem, but he also built shrines to the goddess Asherah (2 Kings 18:22).
‘And over the next four centuries, the Temple itself came to have altars and shrines to Asherah,
Baal, and other deities (2 Kings 23:4-13). Thus, he concludes, the early people of Israel were
not monotheists, believers in only one god. Elijah’s contest with the 450 prophets of Baal and
400 prophets of Asherah in the First Book of Kings (18:19-40) demonstrates this. There
could not be 950 prophets of other gods if Yahweh were the only god worshipped in Israel.

The Rise of Modernity and New egdemie”
Disciplines: Oriental Studies, Anthropology,

Sociology, and aS,
Related to the development of the printing press was the ‘ion, which led.

to another step in the development of Religious Studies. As we shall see in Chapter 6, the
Protestant Reformation began when various reformers some of the teachings of
the Roman authorities. Since the Roman authorities based their teachings on their
interpretations of the Bible, it was up to the Protestants to justify their views with different °

interpretations of the same scriptures. in each camp were:

of the accuracy of their own i scholars got the idea that there was’

than one plausible interpretation of scripture. It became another step in the development

of Religious Studies. ”
Another less obvious but. Dperarpcemeramcatpre, be pte merit

Religious Studies was the breakdown of central authority and rise pes mie

in Europe. In Europe's peepee |

authority, As welnoted in 2, from the time Pope Leo

(800 ce), the: theoretically been the source of political era

had to obey the peep teabraee as +a

became dis emperor could send his armies
economy was changing and the emperor did not
loyallyassals or his troops. As various regions of Eultope developed economic independence,
they began to demand political autonomy as well:Since the emperor's power was legitimated
based on the Roman Church's authority, it was up to those who wanted independence to
Europe's various regional leaders Ghose the latter option, starting with Henry VIII in
England, Instead of separating, from religion, he created the Church of England,
independent of the Church . He had no disagreements with the pope concerning
doctrine. And itis true that Hénry wanted a divorce because his wife had produced no male
heirs. But more im ; Henry did not want the income from local churches going to
Rome, while he had to pay the salaries of local clergy. So he made himself the head of the
Church of Englafia!= a position still held by the British monarchs.
)

‘THE EARLY DEVELOPMENT OF RELIGIOUS STUDIES

--- Page 2 ---
Other regions began to declare independence and express loyalty to new interpretations
of Christianity those of Luther or Calvin, or example. This process began the development
of Europe's modern countries. But the birth of these states was not easy. (“States” are
‘geopolitical entities with fixed borders, in contrast with “nations” or “empires” that do not
necessarily have fixed boundaries.) There was a great deal of conflict over who got to lead
them and how to establish the borders between them. For over a century, Europe's “Wars of
Religion” raged. Various Protestant and Catholic factions battled for control across Europe,
culminating in the horrendously bloody Thirty Years War. Finally, in 1648, the combatants
agreed to stop fighting and recognize a formula that had been developed nearly a century

before in a failed effort to bring peace. According to this “Westphalia (named after
the city where it was articulated in 1555), each ruler had the right to ine the religion
of his own territory. So parts of what would become Germany (established in 1871) became

officially Lutheran, Switzerland was Calvinist, and so on.
Political implications aside, what this period again, highlighted to scholars was the
human element in scriptural interpretation. The existence of multiple and conflicting
interpretations of a single scripture prompted. to examine the very process of
interpretation and, more specifically, how mn. The need to demonstrate rules
careful reasoning became a serious responsbilit. This examination of how people
in fact, became a preeminent concern philosophers. They wanted to
how reason worked and under what conditions it could be trusted.
‘Another major concer of mbdem philosophy was political theory. Under the t- modern
system, people's responsibility the clerks of the realm, who the clergy
(the two terms are related),As we saw in Chapter 2, obedience was the leader
was under divine sanction. In the modern age, by contrast, sovereigntylultimately resides in
the people (the meaning of democracy”). Everyone is endowed with dignity, freedom, and
the wits to orden their own lives under normal circumstances» Since their efforts are most
effective when used cooperatively, modern loped the idea of a “social
contract” people agreed to give up some\gf their personal autonomy to a
‘government that rules in accordance with the collective will of the people. Even so, it is

re te ecliration of Independence put

‘people have the right to “life, liberty, and) it of happiness.” However, religious
ities had denied some of these i i
them, (In fact, the Roman Catholic
Europe's modern political

the separation of religious authority from political authority.
i in reason, in turn, contributed to the development of

Christian religions other than their own had been efforts to demonstrate the
superiority oftheir own religions. The paradigm of this genre was Thomas Aquinas’ ‘Summa
Contra Gentiles, written in the mid-13th century allegedly to refute Muslim teachings.

explorers’ mandate was not always explicitly religious, although spreading
ity was a common motivation for their efforts. Their major task was to find

~)

PART | THE TOOLS

--- Page 3 ---
sources of wealth (and potential conquests) accessible to their European sponsors. In the
process, however, they discovered cultures entirely new to them, and their reports spurred
some scholars to examine them.

The academic fields of Classics, Oriental Studies, and anthropology developed in this
context. Classics, the study of ancient Rome and Greece, had been a feature of Europe's
young universities since the 16th century, as had Oriental Studies, with experts in such
“oriental languages” as Hebrew, Arabic, and Aramaic. But the fields expanded to include
other languages and cultures, including religions, during the 17th and 18th centuries.
During the 19th century, the field of anthropology developed, with the goal of understanding
human beings, their cultures, languages, and religions. As we shall see, early representatives
of these disciplines struggled with ethnocentrism ~ a preference for their own group’
including its religion. Moreover, their research methods were primitive 0 with
those of later scholars. However, the goal of identifying and describing) i
traditions as objectively as possible, in order to contribute to the
phenomenon of religion as such, became central to Religious Studies.

Max Miller (d. 1900): Oriental Studies and Religion

‘Among the most significant of the early Orientalists Maller. He is best known for

identifying Religious Studies as a field of specialization on its own. He named it

Religionswissenschaft ~ the Science of Religion. y)
Aspect a Sasol the engage enna Mer Wt is native Corea

work in England. Britain controlled Indiaat time, and its agents had collected

of Sanskrit texts. Maller translated and published many N)
of them as  50-volume set he Books ofthe y
East. At the University of Oxford, he Professor 2

of Comparative Philology (the study of languages and ov
literature), and then 's first Professor of \s
Comparative Theology.

‘Maller wanted his observations of Indian traditions Y,

to be well informed and rational, as objective as any \
other idy. He wanted scholars to put aside
whatever religious commitments they might have

and, ‘other people's traditions simply

i rational observers. This kind of ity

to whet Diller: hoped to achieve jg DN Science of
Religion” “

In pursuing this ideal of a Science oPReligion, Miller
was inspired by the new science SfJanguage, Linguistics.
Linguists study many languiges, comparing and
contrasting them, and looking for general patterns. This,
is how scholars should pproach the world’s religions,
according to Mi promising similarity is

that linguists languages as valid and interesting. FIGURE 3.4 Max Mlle. Huiton Archive/Gety Images.

~

‘THE EARLY DEVELOPMENT OF RELIGIOUS STUDIES.

--- Page 4 ---
Maller thought scholars should take this same attitude toward the world’s religions. Just as
any language gives a group of people a set of concepts with which they make sense of their
lives, so too does any religion. “The Science of Language has taught us that there is order
and wisdom in all languages,” Maller said, and he hoped that the Science of Religion would
search for the order and wisdom in all religions. (Miller 1869, Vol. 1,21)

‘The comparative method, which is essential to Linguistics, became essential to Miller's
study of religion, too, As we saw in Chapter 1, he insisted that with both languages and
religions, “He who knows one know none.” The person who simply speaks a language or
practices a religion does not have what is necessary to understand the general phenomenon
of language or the general phenomenon of religion.

Millers own study of Sanskrit and Indian traditions was a modelfor the scientific
approach he preached. Similarities between Sanskrit words and words in Latin, ancient
Greek, and modern languages led him to conclude that there are similarities between

various religions. The Sanskrit word for god, deva, is English word divine, In
the Rig Veda (one of the four “Vedas,” the oldest of Indials sacred texts), there is the father
god Dyaus Pitar. His name is related to Zeus ‘god in ancient Greece, and to
Jupiter, the father god in ancient Rome. (If you three names fast, you can hear

similarity.) Maller spent decades studying the peti cet torn cm
of Greece, Rome, and Europe, and the

We he emp abn eo nt sat
pioneer of this approach, he did not have a perfect score. In several of hi

ii is obvious. For instance, Miller. ‘koecadee
mental faculty... which. man to apprehend the Infinite” Thi8 works well for
Maller’s own Christianity, But not for Buddhism or for many other traditions. Mller's

ityi8 also evident in his comment that. 2»

‘The Science of Religion will for the first time assign to. its right place
> weal . it will restore to the whole history of the world, in
aX (ae

later, Maller says, “Every n the most imperfect and degraded, has
that ought to be sacred to is in all religions a secret yearning after
the true, though unknown, God.” 1,30)

‘Whatever shortcomings Max Miller may have had, though, his contribution to Religious
Studies was enormous. He set for everyone who followed, by saying that the
scademic study of religion Mptld be a science.

Edward Burnett Tylor (d. 1917): Anthropology
and Rell
Some of the same dynamics that gave rise to Religionswissenschaft also influenced the

evelopment of other new academic disciplines, among them anthropology — “the study
of hiuinan beings.” Among the common phenomena Europeans observed as they explored
~)

PART | THE TOOLS

--- Page 5 ---
the “new worlds” (which, of course, were not new to the peoples who lived there) was
what appeared to be religious activity. Many early contributions to Religious Studies
came from this new field of study.

One of the first people to study religions scientifically was also one of the first
anthropologists, Edward Tylor. Tylor held the first chair in anthropology at the University
of Oxford. His best known book is Primitive Culture. Today we do not call oral cultures
“primitive,” because it has a negative connotation. But in Tylor’s perspective, “primitive”
simply meant “early” or “uncomplicated.”

When ‘Tylor’s book came out in 1871, most European scholars saw Europeans as
advanced far beyond the other cultures. This is how they justified their colonizing OfAfrica,
‘Australia, Asia, and the Americas. Darwin's On the Origin of Species had ofily recent
published and was becoming popular among intellectuals. ‘Tylor applied its theory of
evolution ~ the idea that more complex forms of life develop from simpler ones ~ to
cultures. Tylor thought that cultures could be ranked, based on how fair they Had “evolved”:
Australian, Tahitian, Aztec, Chinese, Italian, and upwards toward his own culture.

Another evolutionary idea of Tylor was that, as cultures to more advanced
forms, they sometimes preserved older tools, language, customs, and beliefs. He called these
old things that had been preserved in modern culture “survivals” Archery is now a sport, for
example, but it began as a technology for hunting and warts “survival” of earlier

methods of hunting. When someone sneezes today, we say, “God bless you.” This isa“survival”
from centuries ago, when people believed thatthe soul escapes the body when one sneezes:
“God bless you! is a kind of prayer that God willipuf your soul back into your body quickly,

‘Today this belief is outdated and considered quaint,
but some beliefs that have survived ly human
cultures are still taken seriously, partictlarly in what

‘Tylor called animism. For ‘Tylor, animism was the first
“general philosophy of man and"nature,” and religions
all over the world were based on it.

Animism is seeing ing that moves as having
an anima, a soul or spirit that animates it. Indeed, the
words animate and gnimal are built on anima. Animals
have aniimae (Blufal of anima), and so do trees, rivers,
volcanoes, and anything else that moves. Some cultures
even|attribjute animae to things such as tools.

an evolutionary explanation for animism.
He said that it developed in stages. Barl) humans
observed that the difference between a liying person and
a dead person is that a living person"breathes. So our
distant ancestors thought that ifiyis breath that made
people be alive, Tylor said. Thisis Why in many languages
the word for “soul” is the word for “air” or “breath.” The
English word “spirit” ifptrom the Greek spiré, which

means “breath.” Th® biblical words for “soul” are the FIGURE 3.5 Edward Burnett Tylor. Granger Collection’

Hebrew nefesh and ruah, and the Greek spiré and toto

‘THE EARLY DEVELOPMENT OF RELIGIOUS STUDIES.

a

--- Page 6 ---
‘pneuma; and the Qur’anic terms are the Arabic nafs and ruh ~ which are all words for
“breath” or “air.” So for Tylor, the first stage of animism was to think of the anima, the soul
or spirit, as something that makes a person be alive.

Early people who thought this way, Tylor said, naturally thought of death as the departure
of the anima, the soul or spirit, from the body. But that was not the end of it. Once free of
the body, our ancestors thought, the soul or spirit continued on its own, This is the second
stage of animistic thinking: the soul is what leaves the body at death and goes on by itself.

‘The third stage of animism, according to Tylor, was to think of the anima, the soul or spirit,
as what appears to us when we dream about a dead person, or have a vision of a dead person.
After a loved one dies, we do not erase them from our memories, of course. It is common to
dream about someone who has died, or even see an apparition of, while we are
awake, An important public person such as a religious leader might éven appear to many
people at the same time in different places. If person's dyingjis their soul leaving their body,
then itis natural to think that what appears to us in our: ‘of dead people, and in their
apparitions to us, is their soul, which has left their body. This soul, their anima, now free of

vapour, film, or shadow.” Like a living person, it takes up space, has a shape, and
it weighs almost nothing and ican passthrough walls and doors, and trayel ross great
distances in an instant. >

‘To summarize, then, the; soul, or spirit is \

© what makes a
© what leaves the: at death Y
© ‘what appears’ in dreams and apparitions of dead people.

‘Once early/humans had this idea of the
If human beings have souls that make
that make them be alive, too.
alive is characterized by the ability then the movement of trees blowing in

the wind, rivers, volcanoes, and anything else that moves may be attributed to their having

souls, Indeed, Aristotle thought the stars were moved by souls.

‘The next stage was to think of Souls that had never been in bodies. These “pure” souls are

gods, angels, and demons ( souls that have evil tendencies). Having the “spirit

of God” move you is having/an outside anima take control of your body. The same is true
of being possessed by’ an idea found in a number of the world’s religious traditions.

‘Tylor said that'the development of religious thought was largely the development of

each god, each disembodied anima, was local. It was associated

with a particular thing or place — this river, or that village. But then people developed the
idea of gods with wider domains. Ceres became the goddess of cereal grain ~ not just the
grains'in Rome, but all grains everywhere. Poseidon became the god of all the seas, not just

PART | THE TOOLS


--- Page 7 ---
‘The anima, soul, or spirit is essential to ideas about life after death. In the monotheistic
traditions, there are two main ways of looking at death. The older one is that death destroys
people for a while, but at the end of the world people will be brought to life again; God will,
sive them life (or breath) again. They will be “resurrected.” After the notion that human
beings are a material component animated by a spirit or soul (dualism) began to influence
Christianity, Christians tended to identify themselves with their souls. Then they thought of
death in a different way — that their souls survive death and wait somewhere until the Last
will be rejoined with their bodies; for others, souls remain in the grave until the Last Day.
Then they will be rejoined with their bodies, their lives will be judged, and they will be
consigned either to happiness in heaven or punishment in hell.

In Hinduism and Buddhism, and in many traditions of Asia and Africa, acommon belief
about death is that the anima leaves the body and then animates a di body on earth.
‘As we saw in Chapter 2, this is called reincarnation. Some believe that of male
relatives must be revered lest they become troublesome ghosts.

According to Tylor, all these ideas of life after death are based ing of the soul as
what makes a person be alive and as what survives death. ‘of gods, angels, and
demons are also based on that way of thinking. So believir animae is the basis of all
religions. This allows Tylor to present a simple theory: Religion, he says, is “the
belief in spiritual beings.”

‘Tylor maintains that the most advanced. ns are monotheistic, because they have” °
Pi cbisrperopientetps sn, Apparently uninfluenced
theories of evolution in this regard, he i
than the most complex, isthe most

Macisd Md anes cog ag
its, phantoms, and ghosts have all but disappeared in

educated people's
Teshould be noted here tht Tylor i assuming that religion i piveral phenomenon.
He was brought upiit a culture that distinguished between religion and other aspects of life,
and he assumed that all cultures make the same di since religion in his
culture was with belief in God and the soul, ther cultures for belief
in “spiritual beings” in order to understand what he assumes is their religion. We shall see
other ‘who make the same kinds of ns, and in later chapters we shall see
assumptions are questioned by cont scholars of religion.

James Frazer (d. 1941)Evolution and Religion

‘The most famous student of ‘Tylor was James Frazer. In 1890 Frazer published what
would become one of the ics of Religious Studies, The Golden Bough: A Study in
Magic and Religion. Overthe next 25 years, he expanded The Golden Bough to twelve
volumes, in an exploratipn of the myths, cults, and rituals of many cultures.

Like Tylor and Frazer saw human cultures as evolving through stages. As we
noted, in their view their own cultures were the most advanced and, by comparison, others
)

‘THE EARLY DEVELOPMENT OF RELIGIOUS STUDIES.


--- Page 8 ---
were at earlier stages of development. For many such thinkers, it was Christianity that
marked European culture as the most advanced. They saw monotheism — or at least
Christianity ~ as the most highly developed stage of religious thinking. Communities with
multiple gods were primitive, and their beliefs and rituals were based not on reason but
only on superstitions. They represented an early stage of human development. They were
examples of magic.

‘At the heart of magical thinking, Frazer says, is the belief that certain actions guarantee
certain results. Expressed as a formula,

Do A, and B will happen.

This idea is found not just in magic, of course, but in science and human thinking generally.
‘What distinguishes magic is that its formulae for what actigin will cause what result do not
secs enpcay verable ed vay deplete A cues sl cnc nmeed
they are based only on associations between ideas of A

In magical thinking, if the idea of A is the idea of B, then A and B are
related in the real world. And so one can manij to have an effect on B. One way’
Aand B might be associated is that A is.a part of B. If I want to hurt you, and I have
of your hair, I might do something to way of doing something to you. Another
kkind of association is similarity. If | draw a picture of you and then burn the pictife, this
may hurt you. Some scholars believe that prehistoric cave drawings served it this way.
Perhaps people tried to influen animals by appealing to the pit ‘the animals.
‘sympathetic magic.”
entirely predictable. It does not Fx work, and this
cient peoples, says Frazer. In his view; it was the realization
of the falbiityof magic that led to the development ofa’ more advanced kind of

thinking -
For Ea A
‘over which no direct control. As Daniel i

of magica laws of contact and imitatod, religious people claim thatthe real

behind the natural world are not principles at all; they are personalities - the
supernatural beings we call the dingly, when truly religious people want to
control or change the course they do not normally use magical spells but
rather prayers and pleading de to their favorite god or goddess. Just as if they
were dealing with another htiman person, they ask favors, plead for help, call down
revenge, and make yows of love, loyalty, or obedience. (Pals 2006, 38)

Frazer's ity provides a good example of the evolution from magic to
religion. One of thé many similarities he found between ancient magical rites and Christian
practices corigerned what he called the Corn King. He believed that some early agrarian

elaborate rituals to ensure that their grain crops would come back each
describes their choosing a man to personify the crop for one year. He calls this

B

PART | THE TOOLS

--- Page 9 ---
Cargo Cults and Magic

Cargo cults are the classic example used by scholars of the associative

kind of reasoning in magic. “Cargo cults” is the generic name for a

phenomenon that developed in the South Pacific following the arrival

of Japanese and then Allied forces in World War I. Both groups had
introduced kinds of equipment and quantities of supplies previously unimaginable
to the islanders. The local people witnessed the periodic arrival of food, medicines,
weapons and other supplies via ships and airplanes. it appeared that
shipments occurred following certain actions by the soldiers:
electronic device, writing numbers on sheets of paper, and marchi
‘on an airstrip, for example. After the war and the evacuation of r
‘supplies no longer arrived. Some of the islanders reasoned i
stopped because no one was doing the things the soldiers used to do. Some
islanders attempted to restart the deliveries by ‘actions of the
soldiers. Researchers observed them fashioning io communication
icra fg od gd
down runways just as the soldiers had done plies were delivered. It
‘appeared to them that these actions had pleased the gods, who in response
delivered the supplies from the sky or ). Surely, they would respond again
provided the actions were performed

\7
ss

=

‘THE EARLY DEVELOPMENT OF RELIGIOUS STUDIES.

--- Page 10 ---
person the “Corn King” (“corn” here meaning any grain). The Corn King was identified
with the crop, and so he was treated very well through the growing season. But in the fal,
when it came time to break up the dried stalks and scatter the seeds, the Corn King was
killed and his body was chopped up and scattered across the fields. This ritual was believed
to insure that the seeds would sprout and come up in the spring.

Frazer found “survivals” (to use Tylor’s term) of the ancient beliefs in Christian teachings.
In the Gospels Jesus uses the image of the grain dying and then bringing forth new life:
“Unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains alone. But if it dies, it bears
much fruit” (John 12:24). And New Testament writer Paul uses the image of grain dying

and coming back to life to explain how humans would be res I Corinthians 15).
Frazer also suggests that the idea of Jesus being crucified for the the human race
evolved from the ancient Corn King ritual.

Frazer's general conclusion is that Christianity it magical practices,
replacing unpredictable magical thinking with rel in a God who controlled

Frazer and thatjporytion
of Christian Beli bs
Frazer believed there were many similarities between ancient myths and
Christianity, The anelgntt Greeks and Romans, for example, worshipped 2
vegetati and his mother, Cybelé, who, ints say,
was a virgin. In nd Rome, Cybelé was called “ of the Gods.”
Christianity since Mary was the mother of JesuShand Jesus was God,
Mary was, the Mother of God. So it made sense that When Christians built a
church on ite of the old temple of Cybelé, ier of the Gods,” they
dedicatted jt to Mary, the "Mother of God.”
the ie and resurrection of Attis. celebrated in early spring.
er describes a ritual in which worshippers of Attis mourn his death, but then
the sorrow of the worshippers was tuffiéd to joy. For suddenly a light shone
in the darkness: the tomb was : the god had risen from the dead...
The resurrection of the god|was hailed by his disciples as a promise that they
too would issue triumphanitfrom the corruption of the grave.
To Frazer, this sounds lie Easter. Frazer also sees similarities between Christmas
and ancient rituals éej@brating the Birth of the Sun around December 21, when
after six months of the days getting shorter, they finally start to get longer.
Thus gpl hatte Christan Cwrch chose to edebrote he bithy of
its, ‘on the twenty-fifth of December in order to transfer the devotion
heathen from the Sun to him who was called the Sun of
. (Frazer 2009, 370)

PART | THE TOOLS

