
--- Page 1 ---
Kamikaze: the First Suicide Bombers?

hl

FIGURE 9.5 Kami kaze ~ “the wind of the kami” or “divine wind.” Jail

Most people think of Kamikaze as the deadly attacks by Ja nes, full of
explosives, against Allied sites during World War Il. That is indeed the name given
to these suicide attacks. The name actually comes from the Japanese kami, for
god, and kaze, wind. It is the name given to the, that protected the
Japanese from invading Mongol fieets in the 13th gentury. The practice of
crashing planes into targets began with the use of planes for war. When a plane

was damaged or on the verge of being pilots were instructed to use
them as weapons - @ more honorable cou’ ion. interestingly, the Japanese
were not the only ones instructed to do sp/ American pilots were told to do the’)
same thing. ‘*)
e
wind (kami kaze) and some with natural elements such as toeks and mountains ~
good examples of call animism (see Chapter 5). i are associated with

more abstract. such as growth and healing — good examples of anthropomorphism
(see Chapter 5). are imagined in more human form —'thcluding heroic figures of the
past and and some are considered guard protect specific places or clans.
Unlike tions we have discussed, where deities are in competition with one

ity.

mean, however, that Shinto is devoid of moral teachings. In
as lying, stealing, and murder ~ show extreme disrespect and
as impure. Shrines, asthe abode of kami, are pure, and other places
ceremonies conducted by priests. New buildings, for example, and
even cars are'pommonly purified by priestly rituals.

ing the vast diversity of Shinto, scholars distinguish several kinds of Shinto
practiée, including folk Shinto, state or shrine Shinto, and sect Shinto. Folk Shinto is the

aa aa

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS.

--- Page 2 ---
in agricultural tradition. Consistent with its oral roots, folk Shinto has a remarkable array
of practices and reflects a good deal of syncretism (mixing of elements from a range of
sources). Folk Shinto centers on the veneration of small roadside images and on agricultural
rites associated with planting and harvest. However, it also includes divination and healing
practices (shamanism; see Chapter 5), and spirit possession (see Chapter 2).

‘State Shinto dates from the earliest written records of Shinto, the Kofiki, which describe
the ascendancy of the leaders of a clan who lived near the city of Nara, whose kami was the
sun goddess Amaterasu. (Many countries identify periods in their history by the name of
the ruler or dynasty, such as Britain’s “Victorian Era” or the Chinese “Ming Dynasty” But
Japan's classical history is commonly divided into periods identified by the naiie of the
region or capital of the ruling family ~ reflecting the importance of place in Japanese! :
So the period during which the Kojiki was produced is called the Nara period, 710-754 cx.)
The ruling clan were described as descendants of Amaterasu, and she was considered the

‘most important kami of all. This clan was therefore recognized as the imperial
household and became the center of the Japanese nation. The Kojiki explains that Amaterasu
herself bequeathed to them the Three Sacred Treasures in Shinto ~ the mirror, sword, and
jewel, which represent wisdom, valor, and wealth or ively.

Under this union of Shinto with the state, the government thousands of shrines S)
and provided offerings to the kami. By around 900 ce 3,000 shrines throughout S

Japan receiving state offerings. As the strength of the central government declined, however,
state Shinto declined along with it After 1300, the government supported far fewer shrines aa
authority to this day (even though

demonstrating the fusion of
in Japanese is matsuri-goto,
emperor remains today the head of state as well as the highest in Shinto.
“Shrine Shinto” refers to the common practice centered on visits to,aty of the thousands
of shrines spread across and breadth of Japan. People goto shrines and express
their respect for ‘on special occasions, and to ask for ion and assistance with
sa ni we \slich as seasonal festivals, are
marked by shrines.
“Sect Shinto” is a term devised in the
infained shrines but in private halls
oriented practice than the
13 groups practicing “Sect Shintoism.”
healing, and devotion to a specific as that of the sun or Mount Fuji (the highest

peak in apany/Someak aise gays "considered “new” — dating from only the last century.

>
oO
Shinto Rituals )
‘The most common Shinto ritual is worship at the family shrine ~the kamidana.A kamidana
is a “kami home” where the family kami lives. The kamidana is usually on a high shelf and
contains a ject called a shintai - which can be a mirror, a stone, or any of a wide
~)

mremoenmone  i

--- Page 3 ---
FIGURE 9.6 A Shinto shringWith a torii gate. © s18 Phota/Superstock

variety of other thifigs that are considered suitable places foP the kami to abide. (Kamidana
are also corimonly found in Japanese martial arts studig¥ called dojos.) Kamidana ritual is
simple. It begins with washing the hands and involves)prayers and gifts of food and flowers
to the kami in the shintai.

Public Shinto shrines are identifiable by their distinctive gates ~ torii. Torii are constructed
Shiro upright members and two lintelspaKe upper one longer than the first lintel and
curved. Torii are often unpainted, but Jf they are painted, it is in bright reddish-orange
(vermillion). Shrines may have more than one such gate. Some have many, since it is
common for people to donate forii in gratitude for blessings. Crossing through a torii
symbolizes entry into sacredspace, the domicile of the shrine’s kami.

People go to shrines for’special occasions, entering through the torii into the public
worship and offering halls. There is another room that only the priest can enter, except for
special occasions. Thi is the room housing the shintai.

Rituals at shirgiés vary but commonly include bowing to show respect before entering
the shrine: Pépple also remove their shoes, again to show respect. Many shrines have basins
with Jadlépso that worshipers may wash their hands, mouth, and feet. Some shrines have
bells, which people ring before praying. After prayer people bow again and put their hands
togéttier in a clapping motion before completing a final bow.

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 4 ---
Japanese weddings are traditionally performed at Shinto shrines. In the most traditional
form, the bride is covered in white make-up and wears a white kimono to symbolize that
she is a virgin. Her hat is decorated with good luck charms, and she may also wear a hood
symbolizing deference to her new mother-in-law. The groom wears a black kimono, The
priest purifies the couple and the guests. The couple exchange vows, and then they, their
family, and cose friends drink cups of sake (an alcoholic drink brewed from rice) to
symbolize their union. Traditionally the bride and groom take nine sips of sake. After this,
the bride changes into a red kimono (and then into other fancy kimonos or dresses as well)
and a festive reception begins.

A great variety of other practices are associated with Shinto, including
dance accompanied by music and believed to protect the souls of the newly
to please the ancestor kami. Practices associated with assuring good fortune ate also

common in Shinto. People can buy (or make an offering in return for) a Special amulet for
protection, or for a prediction about their future. But many of these pactice#are a result of
Shinto’s interaction with other traditions (primarily Buddhist) considered folk
practices.

Bahai 7

History and Teachings oy!
yrced in the modern period, |

‘The identity of Shinto and the state in
with the Meiji Restoration in 1868. The_ pipeqatanpoareeaia

reer Thad declined in the Middle Ages feudal
warlords (shoguns) had taken, control of various regions. In 1868, the shoguns ceded
caer etre ectiany a asthe
Emperor Meiji, “the emperoa” The motto of the go officials was
“Shinto ceremonies and affairs are one and the this period of
modernization in  Ecpomamaiotn west Shinto holidays were
declared national and the emperor was revered tie bal of te ation oe

's defeat in World War II, the Ameéritan occupation forces “disestablished”
Shinto as the state religion and forced the to declare that he was human (rather
than a kami). i)

In contrast to this identification of Shinto with the Japanese state, Baha'i isa religion that
forbids political involvement. The Baha'i religion was founded in the mid-1800s by a
Persian nobleman who took thé\aine Baha Ullah (“glory of God”). He was born a Shi'a
Muslim. His followers said that’ he was the latest of a series of prophets that includes
Abraham, Zoroaster, Kristina, Moses, the Buddha, Jesus, and Muhammad. Baha Ullah
wrote over 100 works, which his followers believe to be divinely inspired. Today there are
over six million ‘around the world, representing over 2,100 ethnic, racial, and tribal
groups. Their scriptures have been translated into over 800 languages.

=)

ZOROASTRIANISM, SHINTO, BAHA', SCIENTOLOGY, WICCA, AND SENECA TRADITIONS


--- Page 5 ---
Membership is open to everyone who accepts the teachings of Baha Ullah. There are no
initiation rituals, clergy, sacraments, or worship rituals. Baha'is are governed locally by an
lected assembly. There are also national assemblies, and they come together periodically to
lect the Universal House of Justice, which is the supreme administrative, legislative, and
judicial body for Baha'is.

The essential message of Baha Ullah is unity and peace. The three basic teachings in
Baha'i are the unity of God — Allah in Baha'i texts, the unity of religion, and the unity of the
human race. The concept of God is the familiar monotheistic one of an eternal, transcendent
creator who is omniscient, almighty, and the source of all revelation.

God has sent messengers since ancient times, Baha Ullah taughit. Their messages may
sound different, because each was adapted to a specific time and the essential
revelation in all of them is one. Thus all the world’s religions are valid, Some social rules,
such as dietary restrictions, may be specific to one culture aa particular time, but general
principles, such as charity and being a ood neighbor, hold forall people fr alltime.

death, the soul passes into the next world, is)judged, and proceeds with the

‘Through worship and obedience, prayer and ‘others, they become closer to God. At,
development it began in its earthly life. ————

nearness or distance from God.

‘The teachings of Baha Ullah include discourses on spiritual growth, «fj Baha'is are
‘encouraged to meditate on Ullah describes stages of [ development,
beginning with the desire! closer to God. One must follow tion toward
God as a lover is drawn to ssa rissa pleas anlage Sheen cde
begin to understand ies of life and see God in all creati6n."Losing all traces of ego,

successful seekers willbe unaffected by either good or bad fortune, and wil abide in ecstatic
wood RON Ca
rin ihe ht. ni att mn mien
racism, nationalism, and socal clasge¥ are obstaclestohuman development.
The tesco Bas Utah gh rape unite into a peaceful and integrated
“The earth is but one ag Humankind its citizens” he wrote.
unity of humankind is well in Baba’ itself. Although its members come
from over 2,100 ethnic groups, there are'no factions or sects. Even the process of electing
local and national assemblies invalyevho parties, nominations, or campaigning for office,
For a global society to flourish, Baha Ulah said, it must be based on moral principles. They
include the elimination ofall prejudice, equality between the sexes the elimination of extremes
of poverty and wealth, education, the harmony of scence and religion, a sustainable
balance between technology, and the establishment of a world government.
‘These goals are’ ‘similar to those of the United Nations, and many Baha'is work
in cooperation With the United Nations. Indeed, taking citizenship responsibilities seriously
is a major Baba value, Baha’ are required to obey the laws of their country of residence
and partiipate in elections. However, they are not allowed to join political partes, run for
office,\or accept political appointments. Partisan political involvement is considered
Violation of the Baha'i ethic of working for social unity.
)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 6 ---
Jazz Tuesdays at the Baha’‘i Center,
New York City

FIGURE 9.7 Dizzy
Gillespie. © Cig Lovev
corti

Dizzy Gillespie (d. 1993) was one of the greatestijazz tnimpeters of all time. His
early years reflected the stereotypical jazz life: amazing music interrupted by
drugs, alcohol, and violence. He was also irreverent. In 1964 he ran for president,
He promised that if he were elected, thelWhite House would be renamed “The
Blues House,” and his cabinet Would be cpffiposed of Duke Ellington, Secretary
of State; Miles Davis, Director of the CIA; Max Roach, Secretary of Defense?
Charles Mingus, Secretary of Peace; Ray Charles, Librarian of Congress"™\BUis
Armstrong, Secretary of Agriduitufe; Mary Lou Williams, Ambassador to the
Vatican; Thelonious Monk Traveling Ambassador; and Malcolm x, Attorney
General. He said his;running mate would be Phyllis Diller.

Four years later, Gill@spie became a Baha’. In his memoirs he writes that becoming
2 Baha'i changed his life. He became a teacher and mentor tolyoung artists.

The Baha'i Genter in New York City honors Mr. Gillespie's work, holding jazz
concertsjevery Tuesday. He is now known as the “BeebOp Baha'i.”

Baha’ Rituals
Like Zoroastrianism, Baha'i teaches thatyye have a duty to live in the world and improve it.
Useful work is a form of worship. Baha'is are required to pray daily and abstain from alcohol
and non-medical drugs, gambling ’and extra-marital sex. They also observe an annual
sunrise-to-sunset fast from Mayth 2 to March 20, the final month of the Baha'i calendar,
followed by the celebratiorpf the new year on Nordz.

The Baha'i calendar sonsists of 19 months of 19 days each. The calendar is fixed in
accordance with thé)Gregorian calendar, so four extra days are inserted to make 365.
(During the Gregorian “leap year,” five days are added.) These “intercalary” days are inserted

ZOROASTRIANISM, SHINTO, BAHA', SCIENTOLOGY, WICCA, AND SENECA TRADITIONS

--- Page 7 ---
FIGURE 9.8 Baha'i temple in Wilmette, Illinois, in the U.S. © CorbivSupersock

just before the month of fasting. Known as Ayyam-i Ha, the “days of ld” (which is a symbol
of God), they are th occasion for festive meals, family visits, andigift-giving

Baha'is’ greatest celebration is the 12-day Ridvan Festivalit’begins on April 21 of the
Gregorian calendatyand commemorates the announcement 6f Baha Ullah as prophet. The
first, ninth, and twelfth days are the holiest, and are marked with communal prayers. Other
holy days inclide the declaration of the Bab, the foterdinner of the Baha Ullah (May 23), the
ascension of Baha Ullah to heaven (May 29), thie naftyrdom of the Bab (July 9), the birth
of theBab (November 12), the Day of the Covéhant (November 26), and the ascension of
Bah Ullah’s son Abdul Baha to heaven (Novémber 28).

Baha'is have established a number of houses of worship around the world. Currently,
there are seven: one each in Wilmette, Illinois, in the U.S; Kampala, Uganda; Sydney,
Australia; Frankfurt, Germany; Paiama City, Panama; Tiapapata, Samoa; and Delhi, India.
The first one was built in\Ashgabat, Turkmenistan, but was confiscated by the Soviet
government in 1938, damaged by an earthquake in 1948, and destroyed in 1963. One is
under construction in Santiago, Chile. The Baha’i houses of worship are constructed with
nine sides so that they'seem circular. They have no altars or decoration other than the words
of Baha'i scripfiage’in exquisite calligraphy. They are surrounded by beautiful gardens and
are meant t0'gerve their communities. They are open to all people. No rituals or sermons
are condueted in them, only prayer and meditation.

Matriage is a solemn undertaking in Baha'i, an institution that brings great happiness and
spifitiial development to the spouses, and creates the essential foundation for society ~ the

TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS


--- Page 8 ---
family. The ceremony itself is simple, consisting of vows to abide by the will of God, made
by the bride and groom to each other and witnessed by two people.

Scientology
History and Teachings of Scientology

Although Baha'i is a “new” religion established in the modern age, it is not considered an
NRM (New Religious Movement) because of its ancient origins. Baha'i is to Islam

ie dai ond Christan, nd hry wdc. gare in SA
calls earlier “dispensations” of the one religion, brought by successive “manifestations”
(messengers) of the one God. Scientology, on the other hand, is definitely anew movement,

although, as we shall see, there is some dispute as to whether or not it “religious.”

‘Scientology was founded by L. Ron Hubbard (1911-1986) - American writer
specializing in adventure and fantasy stories. In 1937, ted developing a
worldview based on dualism. “Life is composed of two things,” he wrote, “the material
universe and an X-factor... that can evidently organize and mobilize the material universe.”
This “X-factor” is similar to traditional ideas of spirit In 1950 Hubbard published

Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health, in which he presented a kind of
Psychotherapy for dealing with harmful emotions such as irrational fears. He invented the”
Laroninnctleelend. eaeds excloheghtn

Dianetics is the most popular self of all time, selling over 21 million
but it was met with concern by mental health professionals. The American
Association issued a warning in: afl igaraecleear 5 wae

‘peculiar’ to a new approach t health called Dianetics;” noting that'tHey were not
based on empirical evidence. Soon after its publication, Hubbard Shaping the ideas
in this book into a new that he called “Scientology.” This term had been coined
earlier in the 20th century to refer to either religious devotion or the study of
scienceasa: Hubbard used this in a new way to mean “the study of knowledge
or truth.” Im.1952 he published Scientology, a Religious , and the next year he
founded: ‘in Camden, New Jersey ~ the ‘of Scientology,” the “Church
‘of American Science,” and the “Church of Spirit ering.” The movement spread
quickly in the English-speaking world.

idea in Scientology is that a pierfam is neither a body nor a mind, but an
immortal spiritual being. Sometimes used the word “soul” to refer to the spiritual
essence of a human being. But “soul” means many different things to many different people,
so Hubbard devised a new term, from the Greek letter theta, a traditional symbol
for thought and life. The id, is what a person really is. It is “that which is aware
of being aware,” in his words) jing to Scientology, each thetan has existed for billions
of years, is naturally good) and has been reincarnated in countless bodies in a process
Hubbard called assumption.
‘Scientology teaches that human beings operate on the basis of eight “dynamics” (or
impulses) of survival. The first is the urge for personal survival. The second is the urge to

~)

ZOROASTRIANISM, SHINTO, BAHA', SCIENTOLOGY, WICCA, AND SENECA TRADITIONS


--- Page 9 ---
y

Celebrities in Scientology

From its beginning, Scientology has vigorously recruited celebrities to
join the religion and promote it in the media. In 1955 L. Ron Hubbard
started “Project Celebrity” to get Scientologists to convert actors and
musicians. The Church of Scientology operates special Celebrity Centers

in Los Angeles, Paris, and Nashville. According to religion scholar Hugh B. Urban,

Scientology has a natural appeal for many celebrities because jt celebrates the
individual person (as an immortal spiritual thetan), and it celebrity
lifestyle of wealth and fame. Among the best known celebrity ists are
actors Tom Cruise, Katie Holmes, John Travolta, Kirstie Alley, Jason Lee, and Nancy
Cartwright (the voice of Bart Simpson), and musicallartists Lisa Marie Presley,
Beck, and Edgar Winter. .

e)
an Co en m
ora nation. The fourth is to survive as the human race. And the last four
caper euphotic he pple eg ne
and Supreme Being.

The moral teachings Of Sci are based on these ‘Adopting what
philosophers call a u ethic, Scientology teaches that are those that
benefit the of these dynamics and harm the fewest. As Utilitarianism
would say, goodlactions are those that bring “the greatest good for the greatest number of
people.” ~

Besides ng individuals within the church, Scienftlogists engage in many kinds of
and the Criminon prison rehabilitation program,

Or

tology Practices *)

According to Scientology, people: mental problems because they do not understand

themselves and the nature of life. The goal of Scientology, similar to that of
Hinduism and Bud i9 to help people understand their true nature (bring
“enlightenment” or “ and thus achieve happiness. Scientology distinguishes

between two parts ‘mind. The first is the “analytical mind,” which is rational and
imilaf to what Sigmund Freud called the conscious mind. Mental problems

the other part, the “reactive mind,” which is like what Freud called the
‘These engrams are not readily available to the analytical mind, but
they cause mental problems when the person has an experience similar to a past negative
Just as Freud taught (see Chapter 3), if someone has a negative experience in

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 10 ---
childhood with her father, for example, she may
figures. It is such past negative experiences that cause
our fears, negative thoughts, and irrational behavior,
according to Scientology (and Freud). And because of
reincarnation, we carry engrams of our bad experiences
from life to life. (This part would have been rejected by Image not available in this digital edition.
Freud, who did not believe in reincarnation.) So the
most damaging things in our reactive mind may be
from our previous lives. As engrams accumulate in
the reactive mind, people move further and further
away from their true identity as thetans and so from
happiness.

The main religious practice in Scientology is a
form of therapy called “auditing,” It is designed to
help people reach self-awareness, overcome mental
problems, and achieve higher states of consciousness.
‘A counselor called an “auditor” uses a device called S)
an electro-psychometer ~ E-meter for short ~ to activity in subjects and)
detect troubled areas. The auditor asks them questions and gives directions to help them >
understand themselves and their problems, Traumatic memories are brought into” Y
coe. ee

begin to correct their problems.

‘The goel is for people to ghaduelly We themuclves of ther engrams and slide that
they are immortal spiritual who study Scientology material’ and go
through sessions of auditing from a status of “Preclear” to “Glea®”and then to
“Operating Thetan.” The ultimate goal of the religion is to “clear the plai€t” - to clear all
people of their engrams.

Y
Scientology aan has seta kinds of training to teach people understandings of

Scientology place far mor eiphasis on its therapeutic practices than on its itu. ts

auditors are therefore mote important than its rituals. Nevertheless, Scientology does

ordain ministers to conduct important ceremonies for life events such as weddings and

funerals. Such jes are simple in Scientology. At weddings, the couple pledge

fidelity, marriage} being part of the second dynamic ~ the urge to survive through
~)

mremoenmonee  '
