
--- Page 1 ---
prophet Micah’s saying, “What does the Lord require of you but to do justice, love mercy,
and walk humbly with your God?” (Micah 6:80)

‘While Reform Judaism was at first strongest in Germany, various branches of government
there would recognize only a single kind of Judaism, and this was usually traditional
Orthodoxy. However, in the United States, with its strict separation of religion and politics
(or church and state), there were no such restrictions, and Reform Judaism was able to
flourish. In 1885, American Reform Jews gathered in Pittsburgh to draft a statement of
principles. We can summarize them this way.

1. Every religion attempts “to grasp the Infinite,” and in every book of revelation there
is “the consciousness of the indwelling of God in man.” Judaismhas developed
“the highest conception of the God-idea.”

2. The Bible records the consecration of the Jewish people to its mission as the priests
of the one God. This makes the Bible “the most tof religious and
moral instruction.” Modern scientific discoveries are not incompatible with the
teachings of the Bible, which was written ata tt people did not understand.”
as much as we do now about how nature e)]

3. The 613 Laws of Moses were designed Jewish people forts inion aS”
its national life in Palestine.” Many’ Jaws are no longer “adapted to the views
and habits of modern civilization,” and do not “elevate and sanctify our lives? The

only parts of the Mosaic Litw that are still binding are the general

4. Ande gc Agenti sat eps Spey che dn
originated der the influence of ideas entirely foreign to our present
elie Th mine with a spirit of
Priestly observance in our days is apt obstruct than to
further iiédern spiritual elevation.” Y)

Israels grat Messianic hope forthe ablishment of the kingdom of
is ng. “We consider ourselves no

v

and Islam grew out of Judaism, and “we
appreciate their ‘mission, to aid in the spreading of monotheistic and
moral truth:”“We extedd the hand of fellowship to all who cooperate with us in the
establishment of th reign of truth and righteousness among men.”

7. While Judaism teaches thatthe soul is immortal, “We reject as ideas not rooted in
iefs both in bodily resurrection and in Gehenna and Eden (Hell and
abodes for everlasting punishment and reward.”

Justice is the central concern in Judaism. “In full accordance with the spirit of
saic legislation, which strives to regulate the relations between rich and poor,
De we deem it our duty to participate in the great task of modern times, to solve, on the

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS.

--- Page 2 ---
basis of justice and righteousness, the problems presented by the contrasts and evils
of the present organization of society.”

‘The Central Conference of American Rabbis met in 1937 in Columbus, Ohio. Under the
impact of the horrific persecution of Jews in Europe, they revised parts of the Pittsburgh
Platform. They re-emphasized the idea that Jews are a people, bound by a common history
and religious heritage. They also stressed the importance of the synagogue and encouraged
the use of Hebrew in liturgy.

Moses Mendelssohn (1729-1786)
The Father of Haskelah, the Jewish Enlightenment

<n,

FIGURE 6.6 Moses
Mendelssohn, jmagra/Getty
images.

‘Thefirst Jew to become widely known across!Europe was Moses Mendelssohn. He
studied not only his own tradition, but alfo the Enlightenment thinkers of the time
His brilliance was recognized in 1763 When he entered a literary contest and won
the Prize of the Prussian Academyoof the Arts, defeating the philosopher Immanuel
Kant. While traditional Judaism had emphasized the Talmud, Mendelssohn said
that the Bible should berth Basic text in Jewish education. He helped to write a
translation of the Bible into literary German, and within a generation most Jewish
households in centyaEurope had a copy of this Bible. Two of Mendelssohn's
grandchildren Félix and Fanny ~ had outstanding careers as composers of music.

ISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS 3

THE FAMILY

IN MONOTHEISMS:


--- Page 3 ---
Conservative Judaism

By 1880 Reform Judaism had become the most popular form in the United States, and if the
population had simply grown without immigration, then the number of more traditional
Jews would have dwindled even further by the mid-20th century. However, between 1880
and 1920 there was a huge Jewish immigration into the United States from Russia, Poland,
and Eastern Europe. These people were mostly traditional Jews whose religious views had
not been affected much by the Enlightenment. They did not want to drop traditional
customs and laws. As they moved into American cities such as New York, however, many did
see the appeal of being a part of the culture around them. And so many, while not becoming
Reform Jews, became less traditional than Orthodox Jews, those committed to
the traditional interpretations and practices of Jewish life. By the century, there
was a new kind of Judaism for them. It was called Conservative Judaism in the U.S. and
‘Masorti (traditional) Judaism elsewhere. It would keep the traditional elements
of Judaism — Hebrew as the language of prayer, laws, observance of the
Sabbath — but would let people adapt themselves to culture and to science. In 1902

in New York, Solomon Schechter founded the Seminary to train rabbis 2)

in the new Conservative movement.

®)
_? S)
Reconstructionist Judaism =)
One of the more influential rabbis at the Jewish Theological Seminary was Mordechai
Kaplan (4. 1983), who taught over fifty years. Born in Lithuaniaybe started his
career as an Orthodox rabbi. he said, “is the sum of everything about Jewish
people,” not just theis beliefs and rituals. He tKe idea of Jewish
community centers, whole culture of Jews would He especially
wanted to reach the miaity secularized Jews he saw all around him, people who had stopped
observing religious rituals but who still considered themselves Jewish.
In 1922\Kaplan founded the Society for the Advancenént of Judaism, and in 1934 he

published Judlaism as a Civilization. Gradually he a new form of Judaism that he
nstructionism. The major difference this movement and Orthodox,

Reform, and Conservative Judaism is its religious aturalism, the tendency to stress ethical
and spirituality as natural parts life, rather than stemming from

supernatural sources. Kaplan taught is not a supernatural person, but a force or
‘energy that improves human life. “Gods the power that makes for salvation,” the sum of all
natural processes that allow humafisto live meaningful, fulfilled lives. Kaplan wrote that “to
believe in God means to take for granted that it is man’s destiny to rise above the brute and
to eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation from human society.” (Kaplan quoted in
“Reconstructionist Judaism,” http://en.academic.ru/dic.nsf/enwiki/15963). He also rejected
the idea that the Jews tre God's Chosen People. This claim, he said, only alienates Jews from
the rest of
For many Jews, Kaplan's naturalism was incompatible with the Torah as revelation from
a and so Reconstructionist Judaism has never attracted many members.
Worl there are fewer than 100 Reconstructionist synagogues. In 1945 the Union of
Rabbis of the United States and Canada accused Kaplan of “atheism [and]

~)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

a

4

Y
°

--- Page 4 ---
heresy,” and of “disbelief in the basic tenets of Judaism.” He was excommunicated and his
Sabbath Prayer Book was burned during a ceremony at a hotel in New York City.

The Rituals of Judaism

Jewish life centers on sanctifying everyday life ~ that is, making it holy. The center is the
family, and so many rituals are observed in the home, such as the weekly Sabbath dinner,
the Passover Seder, and Hanukkah celebrations.

The shabas, or Sabbath, is observed each week from sunset Friday to sunset Satitrday.
Members of the family finish their work on Friday afternoon, bathe, and) put om fresh
clothes. After sundown, the family gathers in the home for a meal prepared earlier. The food
is blessed and there are other prayers. On Friday evening or Saturday mothing the family
goes to the synagogue or temple in the morning, where they worship, and hear readings
from the Torah. Orthodox Jews follow the traditional laws forbidding work during the
Sabbath. Since driving is considered work, Orthodox
and Conservative Jews often walk to the synagogue for
services. Many consider turning on electrical devices to
be work, and so they use pre-set timers.

The most important object in any synagogue or
temple is the Torah scroll. It is kept in thederk, an
ornamented cabinet at the front of the hall where a
lamp burns to mark its presence. An important part of
the service is opening the curtains in front of the ark
and removing the Torah Scroll to"fead it to the
congregation.

Like most traditions, Judaism has rituals to mark the
major events in life. Bight day’ after a boy is born, there
is the bris, circumeision. The transition to adulthood is
marked by a Bar Mitgvah for boys and a Bat Mizvah for
girls (in non‘Orthodox communities) at age 12-13, Bar
means Sof, and Bat means daughter; Mitevah means
commandment. So Bar Mitzvah or Bat Mitzvah méaiis
that theyOung man or woman is now bound by the law.
While‘no ceremony is required to mark this transition,
and none is mentioned in the Talmud, Sver the last
century most Jewish families have chbsen to have a
ceremony in a synagogue or temple, and then a reception
in a party setting, At Sabbath setyices the young man or
woman is called up to recitéa’ blessing over the Torah
reading, and perhaps tolead the congregation in prayers. FiGURE 6.7 At his Bar Mitzvah ceremony, a young
They may also give.a short speech that begins, “Today man holds the Torah Scrolls. © CaptuedNuancel
Tama man/woman? iStockohor.


--- Page 5 ---
There are also rituals for Jewish weddings, such as having the couple stand under a
chuppab or canopy, and having the groom crush a glass with his foot at the end.

‘At death there is a simple ceremony and burial in a plain pine coffin. Jewish law forbids
embalming and requires that the body be buried within 24 hours. Just before the funeral
begins, the immediate relatives of the deceased tear their garments, or the rabbi may hand
them torn black ribbons to pin on their clothes, to symbolize their loss. Traditionally, after
the burial, there isa seven-day period of mourning called sitting shivah.

In the Jewish calendar, there are several feasts associated with the seasons. The New Year
is Rosh Hashanah in the fall. Then nine days later is Yorn Kippur, the Day of Atonement.
‘Together, these Days of Awe, also called the High Holy Days in the U:S, mark the season of
penitence. Also inthe fll is Sukkot, the Feast of Tabernacles, harvest fetival for which the
family builds a shelter outside, covers it with branches or fronds, and eats their meals inside
it. Then in December is Hanukkah, which commemorates the victory of the Jews rebelling
against their Syrian overlords in the second century act. Inthe spring is Passover, the
celebration of the liberation of the people of Israel from in Egypt, as told in Exodus.
‘Ata special dinner called the Seder, the family bread to commemorate the
speedy exit of the Hebrews from Egypt. The wine is and there are special prayer

)

Judaism Today Y
Y

‘Today there are 13.3 million Je sridwide. Half live in the sf ith some 6.5
‘million in the U.S. About live in the State of Israel and 12% in. and Russia. In
the U.S., according to the 2000 National Jewish Population Su of Jews identify
themselves as ‘Conservative, 10% as Orthodox, .as Reconstructionist.
In the United there are about 350,000 Jews. Some 2096 are Reform or Liberal, an
approach to Judaism that developed in the U.K.”
As we Judaism has changed significantly’o¥¢r the centuries. Indeed, until the
Tateasth. there was no such term as “hi were Jews, of course, and the
which they lived. They were a people ~ across the globe and thus diverse in
but related nonetheless by being rs of “a great nation” who struggled to
in fidelity to the one God. Hi term “Judaism” refers to an ideology (set of
ideas) reinforced by practices and rituals and supported by institutions. It was coined in
Europe, as a parallel to the term “Christianity” — a term coined only a few centuries earlier
to refer to the raison d’étre for (Christian religio-political institutions and
}). As we saw in Chapter 4, this kind of terminology signals
What Peter Berger wo “objectification” or “reification” of a people's way of life ~

best. They often required revolutionary action.

‘this is not the case in Judaism. There have been many interpretations of Judaic

‘and diverse interpretations coexist among Jews today. While most religious Jews

acsépt the traditional language of God, covenant, Israel, Messiah, and the World to Come,
~)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 6 ---
they are flexible in their interpretations of these words. Reconstructionist Jews do not
believe in a personal God, for example, and neither do some Reform Jews, including rabbis.
Conservative Judaism requires belief in God, but leaves the description of “God” quite
open. Similarly, the Messiah is understood by many Jews to be a better time in the future,
rather than a liberating king. And many do not believe literally in an apocalyptic World to
Come, or even in a personal life after death.

Yet the core teaching of Judaism from ancient times to the present remains that the
people of Israel were chosen by God to be “a kingdom of priests and a holy nation.” God
established a covenant with Abraham and renewed it with Moses at Sinai, and the “people
of Israel” - Jews — are bound by it today. As God’s People, they have a special
and by carrying out this responsibility they make their lives holy and set an example f0¥ the
rest of the world to follow.

Funit christianity |

The History and Teac! ings of Christianity
Origins

What we now call Christianity was started of Nazareth in the first century.

Fe ween jrs Som gn ghd ome
ipepueienemnpion<. cieaig

believe they can discern some facts about Jesus life and teachings.
Jesus grew up in the lower class in a town in Galilee in the northern part of
Palestine (the name the Romans. to the parts of the land of Canaan between the
Jordan River and the Medit ‘now known as the state of Israel and the Palestinian
territories of the West Bank and’ Gaza). When he was about thirty, Jesus began preaching
about “the kingdom of Goi,” “kingdom” here being a translation of the Greek word for
“reign” or “rule” ( Palestine was ruled by Rome at the time, the language of
learning was still ‘The gospels were therefore written in Greek.) The Kingdom or
Reign of God woiild be a world in which people lived the way God has told them to live.
~)

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS

