
--- Page 1 ---
BAHA'I, SCIENTOLOGY,
WICCA, AND SENECA

TRADITIONS

What Makes a “World Religion”?

|
WITH THY | | ||
NEIGHBOR


--- Page 2 ---
The earth is but one country,

and humankind its citizens.
BAHA ULLAH, FOUNDER OF BAHA'I

Yy Y

e
Overview . Makes a “World Religion”?
Zoroastrianism
Judaism, Christianity, slam, Hinduism, Buddhism, Tualams/ History and Teachi
and Confucianism are generally called “world religions,” but Zoroastrianism ©
this designation is questionable since itis not)based on a set Zoroastrian, Rita”
of features they share. For example: y pee So
© Judaism is ancient and influenced mani later traditions, History 3nd Teachings of Shinto
but itis followed by only a tiny fraction of the world’s Shi als
population, while Zoroastrianism 6lder than Judaism ean”
Se History and Teachings of Baha'i
© Judaism, Christianity;and Islam are found throughout SO Baha'i Rituals
the world, but'so is Bahalf; and Confucianism and
‘Taoism are not international traditions, and they call Scientology F
themselves "rather than religions. Si History and Teachings
©. Shifiijs Wena! tredition, but its practitioners, \” Pi alte
someties sy itis a religion and sometimes say iti Beet may waar
nOta religion. . oy nie
. Wicca
issues lead scholars to try to be more inclusive in : ;
their survey of religious traditions. Imthis\chapter we shall Peal cial
survey six more traditions, pointing out key characteristics
that may help us understand the phenomenon of religion. The Traditions of the Seneca
© Zoroastrianism is the ancien tradition of Persia. Pease hreeatl ate bd
Iris monotheistic and scholars believe that its
teachings about the purpose of life, the coming Conclusion: To Be or Not to Be
of a savior, and the afterlife influenced Judaism, a Religion?
Christianity, aid Islam.

a

--- Page 3 ---
© Shinto, the ancient tradition of Japan, isso closely related to the rulers of Japan that it
is often designated simply a national tradition rather than a religion, even though it
involves belief in spiritual beings and rituals focusing on personal and family matters
rather than political issues.

© Bahai is ess than two centuries old and accepts all other religions as valid.

© Scientology was invented by one man as a kind of psychotherapy; then he began calling

religion.

‘© Wicca was developed in the 1950s to resurrect the “nature religions” of the British Isles
before the arrival of Christianity.

. The Seneca, a Native American tribe, had no word or coneept “rligQK" though other

people often talk about their “beliefs” and “religious rituals?”
.

‘After surveying these traditions, we shall return to the ‘defining religion, noting Y
the political and legal implications of the designation. ©
~, >

What Makes a Cone Religion”? >”

a the bt trenches, polos explcnel coven msjer teniitione itt ae spe QA wel.

This is far from a complete examination of the 10,000 traditions identified World

Christian Encyclopedia as ions, not to mention the have gone

‘Taoism because they are jonly called “world religions” ~ the "~ in Religious

‘Studies textbooks. makes them count as “world” religion#? Is it because they are

followed by huge. m of people? This is not true of fiddism. Judaism is included

because it is foundational to two traditions that are ‘by large numbers of people.

But if this to be counted a “world religion?’ then Zoroastrianism should count

100, because ofits enormous influence in the ive of Religious Studies ~on Judaism,

sir weistinedtt npe

igion” one that itis followed by people in divetse regions around the world? This does not
to Confucianism and Taoism, for example, but they are among the Big Seven.

In fact, the inclusion of the seven traditions in the standard listing of “world religions” is
somewhat arbitrary. It grew out ‘efforts by European scholars to understand the
phenomenon of religion, which we discussed in Chapter 3. As we saw, it took some effort
for Western Christian to recognize non-Christian traditions as religions at all,
rather than as mere “s ion,” “magic,” “heresy” or even the dreaded “paganism.” The
phrase “world religi into use when the first Parliament of the World’s Religions
was held in Chicago, during the time of the 1893 world’s fair (the World Columbian
Exposition), ion at the Parliament was neither systematic nor comprehensive.
to courses focused on specific traditions, such as Chinese traditions or Islamic Studies. Over
the past several decades, scholars have thought more carefully about other categories as well,
and‘have tried to treat all religious traditions with equal respect. Some have rejected the
~)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 4 ---
What Is a Pagan?

FIGURE 9.2 Wiccan Beltane Fire Festival, Edinburgh, spring 2008.
Jef. MitchGett mages.

People who grew up in a monotheistic {fadition often hear non-monotheists
referred to as “pagans.” Dictionary definitions of the term range from?
“non-believer” to “polytheist”\— someone who believes in more than onéigod.
The photo above, from National"Geographic, depicts what it calls a. “pagan fire
fest," actually a WicearilBeltane celebration of spring in 2008.

The term “pagan is avoided by scholars of religion because(of its negative
connotations, The terfty€omes from a Latin root that meani\soMeone from the
countryside rather than from the city. The connotation \gBes beyond today’s
adjective “country” - referring to someone who is \unsdphisticated and lacks
polish, sOmeone with the characteristics valorized in “edUntry” music in the U.S.
(See Gretchen Wilson, “Redneck Woman” and Hank “Bocephus” Williams Jr.
“A Country Boy Can Survive.”) Reflecting the torrelation between religion and
PAlities throughout history, a pagan was.someone not involved in the central
government's urban religious organization and therefore was considered
untrustworthy and a potential thréat! So the Latin paganus refers to someone
both uncivilized (literally: not living ih settled/urban society) and uncouth (itera:
not known to anyone in aur group; outlandish ~ meaning from “outside our
land” and therefore strarigé, foreign). A pagan was someone who did not
recognize the religion of the city - the religion that legitimized the central
government. This is why a pagan was a potential traitor, just like anyone else who
failed to recognize-the principles that legitimate the government.


--- Page 5 ---
“church-sect-cult” taxonomy that we mentioned in Chapter 1, seeing the term “church” as
reflecting a unique (ie., not universal) Christian paradigm, and “cult” as unnecessarily
prejudicial. “New Religious Movements” (NRMs) isa phrase introduced by American scholar
J.Gordon Melton (b. 1942) in the 1970s and adopted by many scholars in place of “cult.” As
well, many universities have introduced the study of African Traditional Religions (ATRs)
into the curriculum, along with other “indigenous religions” of colonized areas ~ such as

In this chapter, we shall briefly examine six traditions that do not get counted as “world
religions.” Two of them are ancient, one being international because of its profound
influence on the monotheisms (Zoroastrianism), and the other only in Japan
(Shinto). We shall also look at two new religions (Baha'i and Scie ), and one that
defies categorization as ancient or new (a modern version of an ancient tradition ~ Wicca).
We shall then consider the traditional culture of the Senecajan indigenous people of what
is now New York State. Having surveyed these diverse tfaditions, we should have a broader
eine” > ~ gaaen

Zoroastrianism 3
History and Teachings of Zoroastrianism .°
Before Islam came to Iran (fo! ‘called Persia) in the 7th century, rianism was
the major religion there. It) ‘began in the 9th or 10th century. seg, but it appears in
historical records only in the 6th century ace, Founded by the p: pit was the

the ancient Gretks called Mesopotamia to the West. Scholars'of religion are therefore not
surprised to find that Zoroastrianism has much in cot ith both Hinduism and the
Western istic traditions. Many of the core belief of Christians, Jews and Muslims
have earlier counterparts in Zoroastrian traditi ing to Mary Boyce (2001,1),
sgn min can jigions, and it has probably had more
i on mankind, directly and indirectly) Han any other single faith.” Ideas in Western
i ‘good and evil, the coming of a savior who

, and life after death are examples.
ling to Zoroastrian teaching, the single eternal and
transcendent god, Ahura Mazda, a beautiful and orderly universe. Evils represented
by Angra Mainyu, also ‘ts Ahriman, an evil spirit independent of the great creator
Ahura Mazda. All of history is characterized by the conflict between good and evil, but in

‘triumph over all evil.

that human beings participate in the maintenance of a well
thinking, speaking, and acting well. Prefiguring the biblical teaching,
Zoroastrianism teaches that at the end of time, a savior ~ a Saoshyant (“one who brings
benefit") Swill renew the world, restoring its perfect order. The Saoshyant, according to
will be born of a virgin — a characteristic that was later stressed in Christian and
Islafnic teachings about Jesus. Dead people will be resurrected and they, along with the

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 6 ---
people still living at that time, will be judged. From a History of Religions perspective (see
Chapter 4), this appears to be a forerunner of biblical teachings about the Last Judgment.

The details of the final judgment vary slightly in different Zoroastrian traditions.
According to some versions, judgment will be by ordeal. People will have to walk through a
river of molten stone. To those whose thoughts, words, and deeds were pure, the river will
feel like cool milk. Those who contributed to disorder through dishonest thoughts, words,
or deeds will, of course, burn. According to another version, people will have to cross a very
narrow bridge suspended above fires of molten rock. Those whose thoughts, words, and
deeds were pure will be guided easily across the bridge by the luminous reflection of their
souls. This reflection will be in the form of a pure — or “virginal” — angelic figure)
standing in paradise at the end of the bridge.

‘Scholars have coined a technical term for a “guide for the soul” - psychopemp —because
such figures are found in a number of traditions around the world, The role
can be played by ancestors, for example, as they are in some African traditions, or angels, as
in some folk traditions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. In the Persian language,
the term for the daena is din, which, as we saw in Chapter 1, i the English term
“eligion” ~so that religion becomes the “guide for the soul.” The Persian term is also related
to the Sanskrit dharma, which, as we saw in Chapter 7, can ted as law or duty —
also appropriate “guides for the soul.”

Interestingly, scholars see the Zoroastrian daena as a possible source for the traditional
Islamic teaching of the houris. As we saw in 6, houris are mentioned in the Qur'anty
‘as “pure companions” for those who make it te . But in Islamic traditional lit a
(hadiths), they are described as voluptuous virgins awaiting righteous men,
without saying that these traditions passed on by males, some of whorh have
determined that there will be; beauties awaiting them. Why 72? The Muslim
traditionists do not explain, But in a fascinating coincidence, the special belt kushti (or
kkusti) ~ that Zoroastrians wear f0F prayer is made of 72 perfectly white wo®! threads. These
72 threads represent the of Zoroastrian scripture (Yas the main collection
and the ritual recitation of scripture). Kushti means “pa ;” again indicating a
connection with ion of daena as a psychopomp. The ian undershirt worn
se csr sedreh), “good” of ous path.” And in another
fascinating , some scholars relate the term to the Sanskrit shudra. As we
sawin 7, in Hindu teaching the shudras are, varna. But the root meaning
“color of the soul,” which’ seems to tie in with the notion of the

scripture was revealed to the human race
through a prophet, inthis case holy volume is called the Avesta. It includes the

through a number of Entities or Attributes, called the Bounteous immortals. In Zoroaster’s

writings, these ‘are sometimes presented as abstract concepts and other times

described as if they ate persons. In one version ofthe theology, Ahura Mazda had rival twin

sons, Spenta Maitiy’ (Bounteous Spirit) and Angra Mainyu (Destructive Spirit). The first
~)

ZOROASTRIANISM, SHINTO, BAHA', SCIENTOLOGY, WICCA, AND SENECA TRADITIONS


--- Page 7 ---
Freddie Mercury, Famous Zoroastrian

FIGURE 9.3 Freddie Mercury
© Hulton Deutsch ColectionCorbis

Freddie Mercury (d. 1991), lead singer of the British band Queén, Was born Farookh
Bulsara to indian parerits who were Parsees. He grew up in Muribai and was initiated
into Zoroastrianism at age 8 in the ancient ceremony called Mayjote. After a bath of
purification, during which a priest chanted prayers, young Freddie stood before one
of the etiasnal fires and repeated the prayers of acceptance into Zoroastrianism. Then
he was given his shudreh, a shirt made of whitigluslin symbolizing innocence and
Purity. Around his waist the priest tied the kushti, a cord made of pure white lamb’s
ysoo! symbolizing service to humanity Thé-kushti was wrapped around him three
times to remind the young boy of the’ three aspects of Ahura Mazda — creator,
preserver, and rebuilder of the world. Finally, the boy was showered with rice, rose
petals, coconut, and pomegrahate and dressed in his new clothes.

In Mumbai, Freddie attended St. Peter's boarding school, where he learned
Western classical music blong with Indian music. There he and four schoolmates
formed the rock bani The Hectics, in which he played piano. When he was 18,
Freddie's family moved to Britain, where he attended Ealing College of Art in London.
Later he playediin several bands, most famously Queen, which he formed with Brian
May, Roger ylor, and John Deacon. Freddie wrote most of their hit songs, including
Bohemia Rhapsody and We Are the Champions. When Mercury died in 1991, his
funeral was conducted by Zoroastrian priests in the ancient Avestan language.


--- Page 8 ---
chose good, and so is associated with truth, justice, and life. The Destructive Spirit, Angra
Mainyu, chose evil and so destruction, injustice, and death. In Zoroaster’s telling, these
forces are under the ultimate control of Ahura Mazda. However, after Zoroaster was gone,
some of these forces were re-described by later generations as gods themselves. In some
interpretations, Ahura Mazda was identified as the god of good and Angra Mainyu as the
god of evil, calling into question the monotheism of Zoroastrianism.

In the 7th century, when Arabs brought Islam to Persia, many Persians converted to the
new religion. In the 8th-10th centuries, Zoroastrianism was suppressed in Persia, so many
of its members emigrated east to India, settling in the Gujarat and Marahrashtra states,
especially around Mumbai. There they were called “Parsees,” that is, Persians. Most
were farmers until the British colonized India in the 18th century. They flouris
the British, adopting British customs and dress. By the 19th century, the Parsees were well
known in Indian society for their education, generosity, and success in

‘Today there are fewer than 200,000 Zoroastrians worldwide,
Famous Zoroastrians include the orchestra conductor Zubin

they tend to have fewer children than their neighbors.
have contributed to the decline in the number of Zoroastrians.

Zoroastrian Rituals

‘The energy of Ahura Mazda, the creator, ted by fre, the sun, and lightifigbneral
(This is why General Electric used\“Mazda” as a brand name for light bulbs frost 1909 to
1945.) Zoroastrians pray in front of a fire or a source of light. Rituals center“around fire,
keeping it lit, and feeding the times a day. ~

The centrality of firein i ritual has misled some into believing that Zorosstrians
are “fire-worshipers.” They do not worship fire. Instead, fire Ahura Mazda and itis
seen as a purifying element. Zoroastrian worship services are cartied out in a “fire temple” —
a building that an urn with a fire and a source of fire is in a small central
room with, source of light. The fire is maintained'by a priest, the only person allowed
to enter the special room. The priest conducts the Yasnd service, the recitation of Avestas in
theirlentirety. At the end of the recitation, the ppriést makes an offering “to the water” of a
i hhoama twigs (see Chapter 7), and milk, for symbolic purification.
The most important Zoroastrian yY is the beginning of the new year, Nordz,
tlre ty ao cre oe ie a
(Spring) equinox, around March 21. Even after Zoroastrianism was marginalized by Islam
in Iran, Noraz remained a holiday, as it is still throughout regions influenced by
Persia. It remains a holiday in pany parts of Central Asia, India, Afghanistan, and Kashmir,
though generally without Feligious significance for non-Zoroastrians, and is celebrated by
Baha'is and some Muslitns asa religious holiday, too.

Similar to Jewishpractice associated with Passover, Zoroastrians prepare for Noraz
with a thorough" housecleaning. As well, on the last Tuesday evening of the year is the

~)

ZOROASTRIANISM, SHINTO, BAHA', SCIENTOLOGY, WICCA, AND SENECA TRADITIONS

--- Page 9 ---
fi

FIGURE 9.4 A Zoroastrian priest starts a fire as part of Sadeh, the ancient feast <elebrating
the creation of fire. © tye UbquitouluperStock

“Festival of the Fire.” People build fires outside and jump oyer.them. In the secular
celebrations of Noriz, people think of this as marking the transition from the old year to
the new year, The religious meaning is expressed in a prayer inwhich people consign their
fears, weakness, afid suffering to the fire for purification, exchanging them for courage,
strength, afid health in the new year.

It is also common for people to precede the holiday with prayers at the family cemetery.
Reflecting the folk belief that the ancestors’ spirits visit at this time, children traditionally
put omghost” costumes and go from house to house to get sweets.

Oh new year's day itself, people put on neW clothes and begin a 12-day period of visiting
family members and friends, where they/are served sherbet, pastries, and dried fruits and
nuts, A special table is set for Norazsthe “Seven S's” (haft sin) table, with flowers and seven
items beginning with the letter “a? These items symbolize good things for the new year:
rebirth, wealth, love, beautyyhedlth, and patience.

Zoroastrians share with Hindus a concern for purity. This is perhaps most evident in
their unique funerary practice. According to Zoroastrian rules of purity, a corpse is utterly
impure — the ultimate'pollutant. Only specially ordained “pollutant caretakers” - nasellars ~
can handle thei safely. The nasellar takes the corpse to a dakhma ~ a circular tower with an
inclined plang 6n top (known in English as “towers of silence”), where itis exposed to the
elements (aiid birds of prey) until all that is left are bones. Once the bones are thoroughly
dried out, they are put in a pit at the center of the tower where they gradually disintegrate
andidisappear into the soil, eventually to be washed to sea.

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 10 ---
Shinto
History and Teachings of Shinto

AAs we saw, many of Zoroastrians’ foundational beliefs are shared by other monotheists
throughout the world, and the secular celebration of the new year in the spring is popular
in diverse cultures. Shinto, by contrast, is an ancient tradition grounded in one place and
one culture, Japan. It flourished in Japan long before the Chinese traditions of Confucianism
and Buddhism arrived, and has continued to reflect Japanese culture and values throughout
the ages.
Shinto has no founder, no inerrant doctrines, and no scriptures that are

sacred, as if they were revealed by a god. The oldest written record of its teachings and

practices dates from the 8th century. Known as the Kojiki (“Records of Aticient Matters”),
this text includes a story describing the creation of Japan. The the
creation of a new, perfect land. After some missteps, the eight islands of Japan were created.
‘The missteps had to do with attempts to defy the laws of nature J which in the story

included the priority of males over females. According to the stOFy, when the man and
‘woman commissioned by the gods to create this beautiful place began their project, the
woman greeted the man first ~ and nothing happen tried again, but with the
man speaking first; this time things went much more smoothly. 7
‘As we have seen (in Chapters 5 and 7, fr example), explanations for the subservient
status of women are not unusual in religious tfaditions. They reflect the rise in the

status of warriors as human beings made the transition from hunter-gatherer to

bn denn Wa a ri min

livelihood depended. With the of warriors came the domination of ales over
females — particularly in theif controf of female sexuality, as warriors sought.to make sure
that their offspring alone benefited from the fruits of their labor. to is not one
oft unions hag esa tetrecs isle end ome ‘emphasis in the
Kojiki is less om social or teachings than on the rise of the imperial family who
of Japan”), also fromthe 8th century, focuses even more intently of formalizing the imperial
government. ‘early sources demonstrate that, fromthe beginning, Shinto has been a
strictly tradition and reflects a fundamental ofientation toward nature.

nto $$ not the only tradition that has influiericed Japan. We saw in Chapter 8 that
came to Japan from Korea in the\6th century, and Confucianism not long
: Macy Shino rine wer bu Wo grounds of Bods temples and erence

from the earliest written records of Shinto show signs of Buddhist influence. Starting
around 1600, religious scholars in Japan emphasized the unity of Shinto and Confucian
teachings in such things as the of filial piety, sincerity and loyalty, and the need for

emperors to show wisdom, and courage. Still, Shinto remains the indigenous
tradition of Japan.

‘The word Shinto the Chinese Shentao, which means “the way of kami.” In a
‘general sense, kami divine or supernatural power ~ “the force” or power of the
universe, which i, i sacred in all its manifestations. In a narrower sense, kami

~)

parece i
