
--- Page 1 ---
“Limaginleterenitys pretty much the same, one season to the next?”

FIGURE 7.1. © Donald Relly 1997/The New Yorker Colectiontwww.cartoonbank com,

The Religion Toolkit: A Complete Guide to Religious Studies, First Edition. John Morreall and Tamara Sonn.
(© 2012 Joba Morreall and Tamara Sonn. Published 2012 by Blackwell Publishing Led.

--- Page 2 ---
Lead me from the unreal to the Real.

Lead me from darkness unto Light.
BRIHADARANYAKA UPANISHAD

~
>” a
Overview Hinduism and Buddhism oy

Hinduism
saw rn fm Joon Criterion gaa Wage? History and Teachi
Indian traditions of Hinduism and Buddhism, we find some Mogien Tot
major differences. oY
© Indian traditions were started and. ‘human Buddhism we
beings, without divine intervention. Heap rit of Buddhism

lusion: Religious Studies
ind Indian Traditions


--- Page 3 ---
© Indian traditions do not take ordinary experience at face value, but see it as maya,
illusory.
© Ordinary experience is often compared to dreaming, and a major goal in Hinduism
and Buddhism is enlightenment, waking up to the true nature of reality.
© This correct understanding, or “waking up,” is true happiness.
© The ways to achieve correct understanding are many.
© One's spiritual path may involve devotion to a god, but it need not.
© There are many gods in Eastern traditions. Some people believe in one ultimate
God; some believe in many gods; some believe in no gods.
© Indian traditions generally do not think of the gods and as ruling the
universe by giving people commands.
° itural beings are more like saints in ity, sources of aid and
Supernatural beings patron Christidnity

‘© Hindus and Buddhists both believe in rei
© Individuals are born over and over again, jhito lifetime after lifetime, until they
escape the cycle of rebirth by’ % rm)
© Gods and teachers may guide people in their efforts, but they do not “ all or
“save” them. Ultimately, péople’s karma is their own.
Despite these differences, ae tn rn i
‘Western monotheisms. = the ppiaton of me Rain \dies categories and
methods have been rejected by some rmexibers of taunt?

Y Hinduism and Buddhism

As in Chapter 1, “Hinduism” is not the'gamé of one tradition, but a term used to
hundreds of traditions that originated in India. Buddhism is somewhat

believe that karma works

@)

a number of commonalities - among them, their ideas about
is thought of as linear, like the flight of an arrow. It has a beginning,
|, and goes in one direction only. Time began when God created the
” from past to future, with each event occurring just once. And at some

moment in the future, God will bring time and the world to an end. Each
perso: physically into earthly life just once, lives for a period of time ranging from
I dasahe co Ae os ems bs aes on

8 PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 4 ---
In the Indian worldview, by contrast, time is cyclic, like the seasons of the year, only with
much larger cycles, Western scientists estimate that the universe is 14.5 billion years old. But
in Indian thought, the universe has been created and destroyed countless times, with each
cycle of creation and destruction lasting much longer than 14.5 billion years. The cycles of
creation and destruction are counted as the days and nights of a creator god, Brahma. He is
‘a minor god, not to be confused with Brahman, Ultimate Reality. A Brahma day is 4,320
million earthly years; a year of Brahma's time equals 3,110,400 million years. And Brahma
lives for 100 years. So the whole cycle of Brahma’s lifetime is 311,040,000 million years ~ 311
trillion years. At the end of the cycle, the universe is inhaled into the body of the gods
Vishnu or Shiva, and it stays there until another Brahma develops to start the

over again. In Indian thought, in other words, the universe and time had no te
beginning and have no foreseeable end.
Each of us, too, had no beginning. We have been reborn ~ “rei ” ~ countless

times, not just as human beings, but perhaps also as animals. And we shall probably be
reborn countless times in the future, until we develop sufficient
cycle of rebirth. This notion of reincarnation is another major dif
traditions and those that came out of India. In Judaism, Chri
death happens just once and is something to look forward
according to the divine commands). Many Christians:
the ultimate goal of human life. However, in Hinduism and Buddhism being reincarnated

is thought of negatively because it means that you have not reached the goal of human life.”
Your next life might be as a lowly peasant, fo le, or even as an animal, because you”
acted badly in this life. For Hindus and iia god esis peta

rather to escape reincarnation.

& Hinduism ai

‘The word “Hitiitlm” is faitly new, and rather imprecise. It tndreds of milions of
people with diverse beliefs, moral systems, and rituals. Some “Hindus” are
monotheists, some afe polytheists, and some are atheists. Somit are vegetarian pacifists who
Tennent ice animal sacrifice. It is better
to think of Hinduism as a family of traditions as.a single religion.

British took over India in the 171 people in India identified themselves
as" ‘Today, there are large sections of ion who do identify themselves as
Hindus, but some Indians resent the termi The word is derived from “Sindhu,” an ancient
Sanskrit word for the Indus River. {uslims entered India, they called the people
living east of the Indus River “Hindy.”"Then when the British made India into a colony, they
used the word as a convenient all the Indians who were not Muslims (or members
of the few minority religions in Thdia, such as Jews and Christians).

India today has over thousand languages written in twenty-four different scripts.

Its rituals show a similar diversity. Even when people celebrate a festival under one

name at one time, they may have different practices and reasons for performing them.

Navaratri, for exiniple, is the festival of Nine Nights. In southeastern India, its mostly
~)

330 MILLION GODS ~ OR NONE: TWO TRADITIONS FROM INDIA


--- Page 5 ---
FIGURE 7.2 Men conduct ritual f6r Durga, who is
worshipped during Navaratrilicdise Batlle DurarvAlamy,

a festival for women, who create colorful scenes with dolls representing deities such as
Lakshmi and Sarasvati. In northwestern India during Navaratri, people light a sacred
lamp and do a dance with Sticks, like the dance the god Krishna did with cowherd girls.
For Navaratri in the north Indian town of Ramnagar, young boys reenact events from
the Ramayana, the\epi€ story about Rama, an avatar (“manifestation”) of the god
Vishnu. For som@\Indians, the last two days of Navaratri are for honoring machines:
they put garland’ of flowers on cars and buses, and bless their computers with
special powde:

Amid allthis diversity, as we said, Indians have a long tradition of tolerance, There are
many paths, they say. What determines whether a particular path is acceptable is not that it
coniforms with a set of beliefs or doctrines, but that itis effective in helping people live in

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 6 ---
accordance with the laws of the universe. If your path works for you and mine works for me,
then everything is as it should be.

History and Teachings of Hinduism

Unlike Western religions, the family of traditions called Hinduism has no single founder or
datable beginning. It developed amid a wave of migrations from Central Asia into India,
which brought new influences to one of the oldest civilizations in the world.

Indus Valley Civilization (3000-1500 sce)
In Pakistan and northwest India, archaeologists have found remnants of a
started about five thousand years ago. It stretched across much of Northwestern India (now

Pakistan) and had several cities. Some were highly developed and planned, such
8 Mohenjo-daro and Harappa. Each of these cities was laid out oma gid and had an
Mohenjo-daro had a pool on the hill, 17 meters by 7 meters by meters deep, that may have
been for ritual bathing. The larger houses in these cities plumbing, and even
bathrooms on the second floor. Scholars have not yet deciphergd their language and do not
know for sure what their culture may have been like, have found female

figurines and carved stone phalluses (representations of penises) that may have been

The Aryans and the Vedas (1 ace) A
Between 2000 and 1500 scx, warrior tribes in central Asia began migrating,
Europe, and some south and east Iran. Of the second group, some'thén moved
southeast into what is now: , and northwest India. They conquered thelocal peoples,
intermarried with them, over them. They called ans ~ “Noble
Ones” — and their ancient Sanskrit. That language in India today,
but for formal purposes rituals, debate, and writing.

‘The Aryans to have had the three social classes ‘to ancient civilizations

use of stimulants and hallucinogens is feature common to a number of ancient
traditions, although their precise natureapid the purpose of their use are difficult to determine
from the little evidence found to

(Over time, the rituals cs complex and the priests called brahenine, insisted
that they had to be performed tictly correctly. Some rituals lasted several days and required
overadowen priests. Sq! ine becanse technical specialists in the proper performance

of ritual. Indeed, being the custodians of the sacrifices gave the brahmins great authority,
since correct perforttance ofthe sacrifices was considered essential to maintaining rita, the
order of the uniyétse.

~)

330 MILLION GODS ~ OR NONE: TWO TRADITIONS FROM INDIA


--- Page 7 ---
Soma
Hallucinogen or Entheogen?

‘Soma is mentioned in ancient Indian texts as an energizing drink.
Itis also mentioned in Zoroastrian scripture (see Chapter 9), where it is
called hoama. In the related ancient languages of India and Persia, the

terms mean the same thing: something “pressed out” or expressed from the

stalks of a plant.

In both the Indian and Persian traditions, soma/hoama is déstribed as a plant
and juice from a plant, as well as a god. In Indian texts, the jul med by
gods and by human beings, whom it makes feel like gods ~ ps a reference
‘to what we today call a “religious experience.”

The nature of the experience induced by
determine. Some texts make it sound as if it
“"We have drunk Soma and become iim
gods discovered.” (Rig Veda 9.48.3) In
curative powers, and as something before battle to give enhanced.
strength or endurance.

Its probable that the effect of soma varied with the strength of the
being used and the ism of the person using it, leading to ajratige of
descriptions from mild stit to hallucinogen. Vd

identi the source of soma as che PAOP vu tht

th America, Europe, Africa, Central and South Asia, It is.

used as a decongestant throughout jions, where it is

sometimes tall jicinal and sometimes inspirationall\Until it was banned by

the US. nd Drug Administration in 2004,ephedra was used in energy
drinks marketed largely to college students, ind athletes.

the use of drugs to facilitate spirit i is not uncommon in

world’s religions. In fact, it is so scholars have coined a word

@f it: entheogen - meaning, liter ing that generates “god within.”
i rant ot at

in consci ‘or awareness, cognition or thinking, mood,

or behavior - that people intespret as metaphysical, sptual, or even supernatural.
Evidence of the use of ‘cactus that produces mescaline) for both medicinal
and spiritual purposes by Native Americans has been documented from as ealy as
the 4th century ect, (itjtil legal for a particular group who call themselves Native
‘American Religion, atthough peyote is a controlled substance for others in the U.S.
Greek and Mesopotamian myths refer to flowers ~ perhaps

plants that give eternal youth or immortality, common in ancient stories,
ry been variants on this theme, reflecting awareness that some substances

iat least make people feel immortal. Perhaps the tree that Adam and Eve were not
supposed to eat from was an entheogen, Some scholars even argue about whether
Jesus’ healing miracles could be attributed to the use of psychoactive drugs.


--- Page 8 ---
Forconducting and understanding the rituals, the brahmins used four kinds of composition
dating from between 1500 and 600 ace. Together they are called the Vedas, from the Sanskrit
root vid, meaning “to know.” (Vid is the source of our words “video,” “vision,” “wit,” and
“wise.”) The Rig Veda consists of hymns to the gods; the Yajur and Sama Vedas are ritual
formulas, and the Atharva Veda is mainly practical information regarding healing and other
important tasks. The Vedas are traditionally ascribed to ancient “seers,” called rishis, who
“heard” or “perceived” them. That is, the knowledge they convey is not thought to be “revealed”
in the way that Western scriptures are. Instead, the Rishis had extraordinary abilities to
understand Reality, to “see” it as it truly is, and to convey that information in language.

‘The oldest of the four Vedas - the Rig - contains 1,028 hymns to various gods.lindra, the
‘god of war and weather, is the most frequently praised, but there seems to be no hi
among the gods. Agni, the god of fire, is the second most often praised. Many of the deities
are described in diverse ways. Soma is sometimes identified as the moon, for example, and
sometimes as a sacred hallucinogenic beverage. The goddess Sarasvati i¥ worshipped
sometimes asa river and sometimes as the one who inspires people with noble thoughts. In

later centuries, she would be the goddess of learning and the is identified with
light or the mind, and in some passages is called mother Bods. Scholars see this
diversity as evidence of the ancient origins of the tradition as yl as of the multiple groups
contributing to its development. Just as we saw with Bible (Chapter 6), not only 9

do ancient traditions change over time, but different groups often have different names for.
particular god, and varying ideas about thatgod’s characteristics and “job description.” >

‘The four Vedas continue to be the most scriptures in Hinduism. The hi a
praise you can give to a text is to call it the “t Veda.” The brahmins say, in t
the vedas were not created but are because they are of divine origin, as is Said of
the Bible and the Qur’an, but ‘wisdom they convey is so profound and’accurate
arreflection of Reality. v
However, the Vedas are not thé only source of wisdom in the t came to be
called Hinduism. The memorized and passed on o: the brahmins for
centuries. When the use of writing developed, the Vedas were down, perhaps by
100 sce. Around time, other forms of wisdom were developing — in particular, the
Upanishads. w

4
The Worldview of the Uy

The are a series of treatises that the most influential in Hindu
‘Although Upanishads continued to be produced for perhaps a millennium and
scholars are unsure of exactly how many thete are (somewhere between 100 and 300), we
know that the earliest was composed around 600 nce, a time of intellectual and cultural
questioning in India and elsewhere."In Greece, Western philosophy was beginning to
develop. The period also Siddhartha Gautama, who began life in the Vedic
tradition but then launched sm. As we shall see, people like Gautama were unhappy
with the emphasis on in India and with the great power wielded by the brahmins.
The Upanishads donot reject the Vedas, but provide a radical new interpretation of
them. That new i tion not only downplays sacrifice and the gods, but presents
significant teachitigS about the nature of the self, of knowledge, and of reality itself.
~)

creme

--- Page 9 ---
Presented in the form of conversations, many of the Upanishads focus on the search for
‘deeper truth than that reflected in the rituals of the brahmins. As the quote at the beginning
of this chapter says, “Lead me from the unreal to the Real. Lead me from darkness unto
Light.”

‘At the core of the Upanishads is the idea that there is a profound unity to all existence,
despite the apparent diversity we experience in our daily lives. The person seeking truth
in the Mundaka Upanishad asks “What is it that, when it is known, everything else
becomes known?” The Chandogya Upanishad tells of a brahmin father whose son came
home from studying the Vedas in a forest school, proud of what he had learned. The
father tells the boy that he must look beyond conventional religioiis knowledge. While it
looks as if there are many things in the world, he says, there is really afily one reality, one
Existence or Being. And all things in the universe are this one ultimate Being. In the
beginning, this one Being had the thought, “Let me grow forth.” And so it projected the
universe out of itself. Having projected everything outiof itself, itis the stuff of which all
things are made.

The essence of all things is the same, then;
apparently separate things in our experience are
is Brahman. It is utterly simple and without
in, but itself it is uncreated and

You are the fire,
You are
You ir,
You ar¢ the moon,
the starry skis. \
are Brahman Supreme: YY
You are the waters - you, ~
Sy Thecretor ofa. 4
You are the dark butterfly,

You are the green parrot with red eyes,
tara \ lala
Beyond tine,

Beyond

The claim that ng is one is amazing enough but, as the dialogue above between
father and son continué&, the father adds something more astounding. He says, “That is
you.” This claim > it, tat tvam asi (from the Chandyoga Upanishad VI-8-7) ~ is
considered one of the grand pronouncements of what will be called Vedanta (“the end of

the idea that all is one. If all is one, then there is no difference between the
jectof experience and the object of experience. The Ultimate Reality Brahman is identical

‘consciousness, the self.
~)

r*) PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 10 ---
Mysticism and Monism

‘The idea that everything is ultimately one is not unique to India. Known
‘as monism to scholars, this idea is found in religious traditions around
the world, including Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. It is part of a
worldview called mysticism. This worldview stems from experiences in
which the ordinary distinctions between things fade away, and what is left is a
powerful sense that All is One. Usually we think that there are many things spread
‘out in space and in time. We commonly think that the mind is different
Boal tis he pone tn apunaias setacog is geen a”
she experiences. But in mystical experience, time and space and the difference
between subject and object disappear.
There are many ways to induce this experience of the
‘Meditation, along with special breathing techniques and other
‘ate sometimes used. Rhythmic chanting and music
‘techniques. Many mystics seem to take up music
a mood in which the ordinary boundaries between dissolve.
Of course, it is perfectly possible to inter experience of the
‘oneness of all existence as the illusion, and the vast diversity of everyday experience

as the reality. However, as William Jams,pointed out (see Chapter 4), mystics
en mee oc they it seems more real than

EN
‘The most common for experiencing the oneness of Atma and

Reality.In ic terms, itis possible to:
To the oneness of the universe, Indians ‘sound Om, a-u-m, in meditation
and ‘Om is said at the beginning and Hindu prayers. It is the most sacred
all Hindu traditions, and is written ‘on doors and walls, and even on

trucks. It is not considered a name as suith, nor is it definable. Its verbal meaning is “to
express loudly [in sound],” with the tion that such expression is in praise. As we

have seen with other terms for ite, the term is best understood as reference to a
reality that can be ‘not captured in language. The Mandukya Upanishad
explains the unity of this term:
Om is eternal Exi Consciousness and Bliss. This entire universe, including our
body, mind and is its manifestation, extension and expansion. Past, present and
fon hey sing but Om. This was true in the past, it is true in the present and

330 MILLION GODS ~ OR NONE: TWO TRADITIONS FROM INDIA

