
--- Page 1 ---
‘community is entitled to follow its own interpretations of the law, leaving judgment to God,
many believe that their own community's interpretations are superior to the others, leading
toa number of conflicts among these “siblings” throughout history.

Employing a “history of religions” (“HR”) methodology, our survey of the three major
monotheistic traditions includes the following.

© The history of the tradition. How did it begin? How did it change over time? What
major groups evolved within each tradition, and how do they stand today? We base this
history on both religious (or “sacred”) sources and scholarly sources from outside the
traditions (secular sources), and will note when there are significant discrepancies
between the two kinds of source.

‘© The teachings of the tradition. We shall include both metaphysical teachings
(teachings about gods, souls, survival of death, etc.) andimoral teachings (teachings
about what is right and wrong).

© The rituals of the tradition. As we saw in Chapter 2, rituals are systematically repeated
actions that are believed to please a deity (god)or ;plish a goal such as healing.
‘This is their religious purpose. Scholarly’ is demonstrates that rituals also.
promote group solidarity and reinforce the béli and the values of the group WER
highlight both aspects of ritual.

‘We shall conclude the chapter with comments about how Religious Studies has impacted

the monotheistic traditions. Y

,

‘We call Judaism, Christianity, and Islam a family because they all trace their origins to the
experiences'of 3 man named Abraham, believed to almost four thousand years
‘agoyand they share many stories, beliefs, and moral fules. (We shall look atthe youngest
of this family, Baha'i, in Chapter 9.) (\)
the centuries, some members of each of these traditions have been hostile to members
‘other two. In a series of invasions of the Middle East beginning in the late 11th century
known as the Crusades, European Christians killed thousands of Muslims and Jews. In 1492,

the king and queen of Spain tall non-Christians living in Spain had to convert or
leave the country. There have \also been similar conflicts within each of the monotheistic
traditions. In 1208, for Pope Innocent III launched a crusade against the Cathars, a
group of Christians in France, whom he declared heretical. Many people today are

aware of the current conflicts between Sunni and Shi'i Muslims in Iraq. Fewer are aware that in
Israel today thereafeoften legal battles between Orthodox Jews and Jews who are not Orthodox.

Despite all the"conflicts within and between various Christian, Jewish, and Muslim
groups, however, they have a great deal in common. All of them started in the Middle East
and are baed on what are believed to be God's words (revelation) as recorded in scripture
(sacred) or holy writings). The Christian New Testament accepts the Hebrew Bible and
bull on it, and Islamic scripture ~ the Qur’an (archaic: Koran) ~ accepts and builds on
~)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD REUGIONS

--- Page 2 ---
both the Hebrew Bible and the New Testament. The Qur'an refers to Jews and Christians as
“People of Scripture” or “People of the Book”

For all three traditions, there is only one God, who created the world, loves his creatures,
and has given people certain orders or “commandments” (things they must do) as well as.
prohibitions (things they must not do). All consider God to be far above and beyond human
characteristics, but each of the traditions generally uses the masculine singular pronoun
“he” when referring to God. He is omnipotent (all-powerful), omniscient (all-knowing),
just, and merciful. And God will judge people at the end of time based on their obedience
to his commandments and prohibitions.

These three traditions also share a linear view of time and history. Time beginsiwith the
creation of the world and goes in just one direction, like an arrow in flight, so
‘moment in history happens just once. (This contrasts with the cyclic view of time in South
Asia, as we shall see in Chapter 7.)

For the People of the Book, God revealed himself at specific tities in BiStory, and he
has spoken through many prophets, The messages of the prophets in traditions are
the major sources for people's understanding of who they are, ‘were created, what
they are supposed to do and what they must not do, and what pen to them when
they die.

The Torah, the rew Bible,
the Old Testament Y

heen oil is Cian a mica he
first five books of the Hebrew Bible. comes from the Greek word for"book,” biblos,
but the Bible is not one book. It isa collection of books written at differenttimes and places
for different reasons. It is More likea small library than a single book. As We saw in Chapter 3,
biblical scholars|have the language, style, and sources for the text in excruciating
detail. They have that most of it was circulated in Oral form for centuries before
being written story of Saul, the first king of the Isfaelites, for example, happens
in the Tth ‘ce, but it was probably first writted down in the 6th century ce.
Other part of the Hebrew Bible were written down mmuich later.

‘There no printing presses at that timeyof-<Course, so even when the stories were
writte/down, they were copied by hand anyonumber of times and circulated among
communities. Scholars believe that both'the oral transmission of stories, and the hand
copying of manuscripts, once the re recorded, could well have led over time to
some variations in the accounts. Some Scholars suggest that this is why scriptures as we now
know them sometimes contain fore than one version of the same event. They believe that
when the people who recorded the scriptures (scribes) encountered variations in the story
of an event in oral or hand®written versions, they simply included all the variations, rather
than trying to determin€which were the “true” versions. That is, many scholars believe that
scribes considered the overall themes of the stories more important than the details. For
example, there aréitwo creation stories in the book of Genesis, the first book of the Hebrew

)

THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS


--- Page 3 ---
Bible. In Chapter 1 of this book, God makes things by speaking. He creates light, for instance,
by saying, “Let there be light.” He makes Adam and Eve by saying, “Let us make humankind
in our image.” In Chapter 2, God creates things in a different order and he makes people
by shaping them out of dirt, rather than by speaking. Nevertheless, the story of creation is
considered to be a single story of the divine origin of all that exists.

‘Scholars have also determined that the various books of the Bible served different
purposes. While Genesis contains mostly stories that explain the origin of the world, the
human race, and the people of Israel, the Psalms are not stories but religious songs addressed
to God. The book of Joshua is mostly history. Leviticus presents rules for the people of
Israel to live by, such as the prohibition on eating pork and Ecclesiastes is a
philosophical essay on how hard it is to make sense of life. The book ealléd Song of Songs
is about romantic love, and does not even mention God.

Over time, different religious groups collected and edpied different scrolls (hand-
written copies of the texts). In the early centuries of the: cera, some writings were
ut onto codexes, flat sheets bound together like boo religious authorities - the
rabbis ~ also looked through the many scrolls and decided which ones would
tert ashen whe wenow eatig J
Hebrew Bible.

i we race from creation to

It starts with God creating everything in six days and resting on the seventh. He creates the
first humans, Adam and his mate Eve, puts them in a beautiful garden, and igives them
dominion over all other crea he tells them not to eat tree at the
center of the garden, the ‘tee of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. him and so
are expelled from the From then on, their lives, and hus ‘generally, will be a
struggle: childbirth inful, they will have to work hard, and’they will die.

This story of, ‘and Eve is taken literally by somej-while others read it as an
explanation of howitis that human beings ~ alone “reatures - have the ability to
make as they attempt to progress their lives. Another way to put
thais to the story describes the fact that human beings ~ again, unlike other

have the right and responsibility to make choices; they have free will. The first

sg bw chose to violate their and were therefore punished.

see in the story a perfect ‘one of the major goals of religious stories:
providing an explanation for death (see Chapter 2).

Later generations of human beings continue to violate God's commands and make bad
choices. God becomes so di t he decides to wipe out the human race with a flood.
However, then he has merc¥ort the family of Noah, and saves them, along with animals to
repopulate the earth flood.

‘The next major eventand the one central to Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, is that God
chooses one man, tobe the father of a new nation that will have a special relationship
bape to leave his home in Ur in today’s Iraq and “go to a country that I

make you a great nation, I will bless you.” (Genesis 12:1-2) Though this

one rape Go's Chonen Pople they will also serve as role models for the rest of the

‘humafi race. “By you all the families of the earth will bless themselves.” (Genesis 123)

Abfiih moves to Canaan, where at first he is an outsider. However, then God makes
a

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 4 ---
covenant (agreement) with him. If he and his descendants will worship God and follow
his laws, he says, “I will give you and your descendants after you the land in which you now
are aliens, all the land of Canaan.” (Genesis 17:8) God changes Abram’s name to Abraham
and, asa sign of the covenant, commands that all the males in his household be circumcised.
‘And though Abraham and his wife Sara are very old, God promises them a son.
Abraham and Sara are at first skeptical about the possibility of having a child. Sara suggests
that Abraham and their maid Hagar might be able to reproduce, and this they do. Hagar’s
son is named Ishmael. However, then Sara also gives birth to a son. She banishes Hagar and
Ishmael, and Sara and Abraham then concentrate their attention on their son Isaac.
God then tests Abraham by telling him to sacrifice his son. Abraham agrees, butat the
last minute an angel appears and substitutes a ram as the sacrificial animal. As

see, there is disagreement between Jews and Muslims about which son was involved in the
near-sacrifice. In the Jewish telling, it is Isaac, with whom God later the covenant,
promising that “I will make your descendants as many as the stars in 5 I will give
them all these lands.” (Genesis 26:4) Isaac’s son Jacob is given the name “Israel,” which
means “the one who wrestled with God,” and this becomes the: people he leads.
Jacob has twelve sons, and they become the heads of the twelve tribes of the people of Israel.
amines cause the descendants of Jacob to leave Canaan where they are slaves
for four centuries. As their oppression worsens, arises, Moses. God tells him
to lead his people out of Egypt and back to Canaan. To force Pharaoh (the Egyptian ruler)
to release them, God inflicts terrible plagués.on the Egyptians, the last of which is the»
slaughter of their firstborn children. The Hebi their doorposts with lamb's

so that this plague skips their houses or! them. It is this event that the
Passover commemorates. The escape Hebrews from Egypt is called the.Bxodus
(meaning “emigration”), and this’ name of the biblical book

Annote about dates: The Hebrew Bible does not specify dates for most events, although,
as we saw in Chapter 5, the Judaic calendar places the events the Book of
Genesis - in particular, rion of the world and the first some 5770 years
consider the earth and the hi jes much older than
Social oped trast between “sacred

‘secular history,” a distinction that, ‘5 of religion are careful to
highlight. ‘we have no evidence apart from.siicred history of the lives of the
specific ‘mentioned in the Hebrew Bible up to this point in our story: the Exodus. We
do! were countless nomadic tribes in the Middle East, and that periodic wars and

caused some tribes to wander far from their traditional pasturelands, so the
migrations from Iraq and Canaan would nothave been unusual. Indeed, scholars trace the
term “Hebrew” to its root meaning, from the other side of the river” Further,
comparing historical evidence from Egypt with the accounts given in the Hebrew Bible,
scholars place the emigration fda Egypt back to Canaan around 1300 sce.

Back to sacred history: ‘he Journey across the Sinai Desert to the Promised Land of
Canaan takes forty years, a¢gording to scripture. During this time, God appears to Moses at
Mount Sinai and gives him a set of laws, including the Ten Commandments. These laws will
be supplemented in subsequent books of scripture, particularly Leviticus and Deuteronomy.
Al the laws togetliet are known as Mosaic Law, and it will become the constitution of the

~)

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS


--- Page 5 ---
HITTITE EMPIRE
ANATOLIA Caimi Yoon gor
wie te yun
‘CYPRUS Byblos, ARAM Ma \
=

Y
MAP 6.1 Map of the Ancient ip »
y
~
people of Israel. the establishment of the covenant With Abraham, God's

communication of the Law to Moses is the central event in thé-history of Judaism.
The Israelites fifally enter Canaan, but not until Mose¥has died. His protégé Joshua
leads them into the land of Canaan. However, there ate many groups already living there.
God directs his people to undertake a series of battlés against the Canaanites. In the first
two, the Israelites (the “people of Israel,” anothefiname for the Hebrews) are commanded to
the inhabitants of the cities of Jericho and Ai, When they win battles, they say
is blessing them for obeying himuafid when they lose battles, they say that God is
punishing them for disobeying him. However, they eventually prevail over the local
inhabitants, and cease their i .
After Joshua, the people of Isfael are no longer led by tribal leaders (people descended
from Abraham and Isaac), but instead by people well versed in the law. They are called
judges. However, finding content with settled life, the people want to become a
kingdom, like other settled groups. God agrees, and Saul becomes the first king, However,
when Saul displeaies God, David replaces him as king. By this time — which scholars place
around 1000 née Based on archaeological evidence - the twelve tribes have coalesced into
two major groupings. The northern ten tribes are identified as the Tribes of Israel, and the
southern two tribes are called the Tribes of Judah. David creates a united kingdom of the
tribes and Judah. His son Solomon succeeds him as king and builds a temple in
becomes the center of worship. The united kingdom does not last long,

~)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 6 ---
Is This Religion?

‘Scholars search early Hebrew scriptures in vain for terms that correspond

‘to the modern term “religion.” The term translated as religion is din, but

‘this term actually means “judgment” (see Chapter 1). The law delivered

by God to the people of Israel through Moses is not limited to any
particular part of life. It pertains to all aspects of life - devotion to God, family
and social relationships, and practical aspects of life such as nutrition and making
2 living, as well as governance. As nomadic people living in tribal comr
they had no need to accommodate other people's ways of doing things,
hypothesize that the distinction between religious (or sacred) and, non-religious
(or secular) aspects of life developed only gradually, as people from
nomadic to settled life. in settled communities (villages, > tribal
groups had to interact with others who had their own norms. I cases the
interaction took the form of violent competition. for . The most

successful settlements were those in which diverse g space for
multiple “lifestyles” - to use modem terminology. To go this, they identified
Certain areas of the law, such as worship and fé as pertaining only
to them. Over centuries, these areas of life would be reserved for “religious law.”
Other aspects of life, such as economie.and political, became “neutral” - or
secular - territory, in which. diverse would negotiate and reach
compromises acceptable to the majority. shall se naples of St RY
throughout our survey of religious traditions.

though. When Solomon dies, the northern tribes become the ki
southern tribes become of Judah.
By this time in the story, the people of Israel have had

such as Abraham, Iggac, and Jacob; judges; and kings.
centuries, 900 nce a new kind of religious leadér emerges, the prophet. A clear
example of one of Weber's ideal types (see prophet’s power and authority
are fot inherited, but come from the voices he hears and the visions he has, along with his
in communicating these experi people. Early prophets included Elijah,
Elisha, and Nathan, Later prophets Isaiah, and Jeremiah.
A central message of the prophets to.the people is that they must be faithful to one god.
Since the exodus from Egypt, the have referred to this god as YHWH or Yahweh,

to Moses during one of their conversations
(Exodus 3:14). The reason ‘had to insist on one god is that the people had other
tells us that two fertility gods, Baal and Asherah, also had

templéin Jerusalem. (2 Kings 23:4-13) Baal, also called Tammuz, is an
agricultural god of Weath and rebirth. Asherah is a fertility goddess who, like Baal, is
meatiotey ancient sources in addition to the Hebrew Bible. Although we have

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS

--- Page 7 ---
no archaeological evidence of the temple itself, numerous figurines of
‘Asherah have been found, so we know that she was represented asa tree
on the bottom and a woman on the top. King Solomon is famous for
building the first Temple in Jerusalem, but the Bible indicates that he
built shrines for Asherah, as well. (2 Kings 18:22)

As the northern kingdom of Israel and the southern kingdom of
Judah are threatened by powerful empires around them, they become
more loyal to Yahweh. The constant message of the prophets is that the
Israelites are not following Yahweh's laws, and will suffer great
punishment if they do not return to his ways. The First Book of Kings
(18:19-40) tells how the prophet Elijah challenges 450 prophets of Baal
and 400 prophets of Asherah to a contest, Each side prepares the wood
for a sacrificial fire, kills a bull and cutsiit up, and places the pieces on
top of the wood. However, instead Of lightifig the fire, they will pray to
their gods to light it for them. of Baal pray to him for \
sino rn ih pe apn hh
‘wandered away, or he is on a j or perhaps ei eery end
be awakened” Then mh pte colt anten et y

v

the ir ofthe Lord fll and consumed the burnt ofeing; the wood,
the stones, and the dust, and even licked up the water that was in the
trench. all the people saw it, they fell on their faces and said,
“The Lord indeed is God; the Lord indeed is God Elijah said to
FIGURE 6.2 Cay figure of Asherah, “Seize the prophets of Baal; do not let One of them escape.”
2 RadowanBbielandPicures they seized them; and Elijah down to the Wadi
Kishon (a river valley), and killed them Where.
>
Despite sigh dramatic displays by the ‘the people of Israel do not turn
completely to Yahweh, and catastrophe does 722 sce the Assyrians ~ a Semitic
peop! Mesopotamia - conquer the nother kingdom of Israel, killing thousands
sand dfiving many refugees into the so of Judah. (These tribes are known as
Lost Tribes of Israel; subsequent history focuses on the Tribes of Judah, from which we
y get the term “Jew.” However, alternate’ indicate that not all members of the northern

»

tribes were killed or dispersed. The Samaritans (see below] claim to be among their
descendants. ) The prophet Jerémiah presents his theodicy (see Chapter 2): this disaster was
God's punishment for disobedience. Afterwards, worship of Yahweh increases in the
southern kingdom, and prophets and kings suppress the worship of all gods other than
Yahweh. Hezekiah, who was king at the time of the Assyrian invasion, destroys images
associated with athier gods, and concentrates the worship of Yahweh at the temple in
Jerusalem. A few?years later, King Josiah bans all worship that is not in the temple. He also
goes temple and gets rid of all the altars and shrines dedicated to Asherah, Baal,
and other gods, along with their priests. From then on, the people of Israel are largely
istic and their worship is based strictly in the temple.

)

8 PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 8 ---
Names for God

The Hebrew Bible employs a number of terms commonly translated as
“God.” In the earliest books, the term “Elohim” is most common. Elohim
is a plural form of the term “El.” Scholars interpret its plural form as
a special usage like the “royal ‘We'" - 2 usage appropriate for royalty,
although Elohim is sometimes used in reference to generic spiritual beings (1 Samuel
28:13) or to gods other than the One God. (See, e.g., Genesis 6:2, Exodus 20:3,)
‘The singular form “El” is the designation for the god of the ancient
Canaan. in a temple in Syria dating from 2300 scr, he is described asithe
‘or supreme or father of the gods. He is the husband of the i
Asherah, although El is used extensively for the One God in Psalms:
of Job. The term sometimes appears as E| Shaddai, “God of
“God Almighty.” Many scholars believe that El is the name gi
Abraham.
YHWH or YHVH — the Tetragrammaton (“four letters”)
‘Yahweh, may have been the name of an ancient Canaanit®'storm god (referenced
in Psalm 29). However, itis also considered tion of himself. it is the
first person singular of the Hebrew verb “to be.” in Exodus 3:14 God answers
Moses’ question as to his identity, u: is term twice: “I am what | am” or
“| am that | am,” or simply, “lam.” In
myself to Abraham, to Isaac, and
them by my name YHWH.",
Still, YHWH is not like 2
God so profound that i never be known fully by human bei
the infinity (unlimited- ineffability (unspeakable-ness) , the term
is considered sacred to be pronounced. It is never ish religious
the térm Adonai, meaning “my Lord,” Use throughout the
5 most common
“the Name" is the

term ho theos (Deus, in Latin

|, the one God. However, God is not

considered a name; it is a designatiohof the supreme being. Human beings can

know what God has revealed al imself but, being infinite, “God” cannot be

defined (or “delimited”) as be the case if “God” were a normal name.

Therefore, as in Judaic pra¢tice, descriptive terms such as Lord, King, and Father
are commonly used.

\slamic scripture, the Qur'an, is written in Arabic, a Semitic language related

to Hebrew. The'tetm for God, allah, “the [only] god,” is very similar to the

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS 8

--- Page 9 ---
Hebrew el. Abilah is pronounced “allah” and that is how itis transliterated in the
Latin alphabet. However, again, Allah is not considered a personal name. There
are countless attributes of God, and these are sometimes called “names.”
‘According to one tradition, God has 3000 names. The angels know 1000 of

‘them; the prophets Abraham, Moses, and Jesus know 1000 of them; the Torah,
‘the Psalms, and the Gospels each contain 300; and the Qur'an contains 99. The
last name ~ the greatest - is known only to God.

Nonetheless, things worsen for the kingdom of when in 586 sce the

Babylonians invade Jerusalem, destroy the temple, anid leaders east to Babylon.
Although they are far from home, many of the Israelites prosper there. With no temple,
they can no longer base their religion on ing gnimals and other temple rituals.
So they turn to other activities, such as writi the books that would later
called the Bible. The Babylonian Captivity, 3s this period is called, lasts about
years, and then another emperor, ia, defeats the Babylonians (for which

the prophet Isaiah [45:1] dubbed him “messiah”. Cyrus lets the Jews return to J
and live according to their own law, but they are still under Persian control. Not all the
Jews do go back to Jerusalem. 5 Adana Ania
Iraq, even today.

scanner (The remsighd¥ the Second Temple

area sacred site in known as the Western Wall; some Claritians call it the Wailing
Wall.) Now wit they are led by Ezra and Nehemiahyappointed by the Persians
to govern the fe ing to tradition, the books of the Hebrew Bible are organized and
edited in by agroup of scholars called the: (assembly), organized

bylEzra. In 444 ace Ezra offically announces the Vath Ths governing the peopl

of From then on, the main religious ‘are following the Torah and

it. Rituals of sacrifice are still held i a Se ot

were in the first temple. And perform public prayer anyplace there is a
‘minyan, a quorum of ten Jewish men, rather than only in the temple.

The people of Israel in J under Persian domination for two centuries, but

they yearn for independence. have apocalyptic visions. As we saw in Chapter 2,

“the apocalypse” refers to the évents associated with the end of the world as we know it,
and scholars often intetpret stories associated with this event as reflections of anguish
and a sense of The fact that the Jewish prophets during this time had
visions of God ing the world and creating a new one in which the Israelites are

rewarded and God’s enemies are destroyed clearly fits this profile. Before the apocalypse,
lict, God will send a great king, descended from King David, to defeat
‘and restore peace and justice. A man was made a king by being anointed
( ‘with oil), and so this hoped-for king is called the Messiah, which means “the
Anbiited One.”

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 10 ---
In 331 nce, the Persians are defeated, not by a Jewish Messiah but by Alexander “the
Great” from Greece. Life under Greek rule turns out to be no better than life under Persian
rule. By this time the Greeks control the entire Middle East and Egypt; the Jews are ruled
first by a Greek governor from Egypt, then one from Syria. In 168 nce the Greek Syrian
governor changes the temple from one dedicated to the worship of Yahweh into one
dedicated to Zeus, the supreme Greek god. In 166 nce there isa Jewish rebellion against this
sacrilege (violation of a sacred object), led by the Maccabee brothers. They rededicate the
temple to Yahweh, an event commemorated in the feast of Hanukkah. For the next century,
Judah is an independent state, but not a strong one, and then in 63 acs the Romansmake it
part of their empire, calling it Judea. ¥

The History and Teachings of Judaism

The story just outlined is about the ancestors of those who now call th Jews, as well
as Christians and Muslims, All three groups trace their roots raham and accept
the Torah as God’s revelation. The story of Judaism as a tradition from Christianity
and Islam begins in the first century of the Common Era.

The First Five Centuries

In the first century, according to first-cen Josephus, there were a number
schools of thought among Jews. The were the Pharisees. They were
from the middle class, and drew from middle and lower classes.

with the Christian Gospels have Pha tucs dotted ar aipching Rac, bat
these slurs were written long. time of Jesus, when his followers weré splitting away
from Judaism. In Jesus’ time, mo8t Pharisees did not interpret scriptureoPthe Mosaic Law
narrowly and rigidly. they wanted to make the law
people could follow. So they said that some rules are more
making moral ju ts, they considered people’ intenti not just their outward

God, a ion of the dead, and a final ju it
risees said that in addition to the writ ~ the Torah of scripture, God had
‘Moses an oral law - or Oral Torah - that was then passed down from generation
to generation in commentaries about the) Jaw. This oral law would eventually be
written down as the Talmud, as we
‘The Sadducees were a second, contrast to the Pharisees and the followers of Jesus,
they were in the upper class of society and they cooperated with the Romans. They
conducted the operations of t .and wanted everything done “by the book.” Disagreeing
with the Pharisees, they. resurrection of the dead, because it is not taught in scripture.
‘They also denied that thépe was an Oral Torah. This group disappeared around 60 ce.
the mainstream population, pursuing spiritual matters) under strict,

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS

