
--- Page 1 ---
fulfilled by something else, such as nationalism. The essentialist approach ~ the idea that
religions do something for people that nothing else can do — has its roots in a branch of
modern philosophy called phenomenology.

Back to Philosophy

‘We mentioned in Chapter 3 that modern philosophy reflected an abiding confidence in
humans’ ability to reason, provided the reasoning in question is carried out properly.
Therefore, modern philosophers tried to identify just what! constituted reliable
reasoning. One of the key figures in this project was Immanuel Kafif (d. 1804). Kant
struggled with the conclusions drawn by another famous modern philosopher, David
Hume (d. 1776), who stressed the importance of sens perceptions as the basis of

knowledge. Hume was so committed to grounding in sense perception that
he denied the objective reality of things such as cause and effect. He said we cannot
observe cause and effect; we can observe only that jing routinely happens after

something else — such as a billiard ball moving. ‘we hit it. We say that the movement,
is “caused” by hitting the ball, but we cannot se the transfer of anything. Kant rej
this radical skepticism. He argued i t there are things that we know wi
having to observe them. For instance, we know that a square has four sides aiid that
material things have dimensions. We know such things a priori, meaning that we know
them without having to obser aad ail
have causes - among our/apriori concepts.

However, Kant continued, we must recognize that this kind of a pdr reasoning resides
in the reasoner, not it being observed. The “thing being obServed” is usually called
the “thing in itselt” (Ding an sich, in Kant's German). In philosophical language, itis called
the noumenor (ple noumena), And Kant said we canniof'€xpect to know it. All we can
know, ing to Kant, is the thing as it appears toys. He called this — the thing as it
‘pears to us the phenomenon (pl. phenomena), Our impressions consist of the things

as they are interpreted through our @ pridri categories of understanding ~ such

as caugality. We can then manipulate these im We can analyze them — reduce them

fir constituent components. And synthesize them — put them together with

other impressions. Either way, we mist be very careful to follow rules of logic if we want our
efforts to result in valid claims. 7

Some philosophers continued'in this line of reasoning, with stress on the importance of
validating claims (or tions,” as philosophers like to call them). Some thinkers
concluded, in fact, that the entire goal of philosophy was to validate claims through careful
reasoning. These thinke® developed what is known as analytic philosophy.

‘According to the basic standards of analytic philosophy, all claims should be subject to
three questions, which may be called the “three Cs.” These questions, as we saw in Chapter 3,

are: “Is thesclaimh clear?” (Are the terms used to make the claim explained carefully, so that
nee the claim can understand just what is being asserted?) “Is it coherent?”

parts of the claim fit together in reasonable ways?) And “Is it credible?” (Does the
om accepted rules of reasoning so that we have good reasons to believe it?)
“J

PART | THE TOOLS

--- Page 2 ---
The three Cs seem very reasonable, of course, but when religious claims are subjected to
them the results can be problematic, as we shall see in the work of analytic philosopher
Antony Flew.

Analytic Philosophy: Antony Flew (d. 2010)

Antony Flew represents a movement within analytic philosophy known as logical
positivism. Logical positivists try to clarify statements, identifying those that are meaningful
and those that are not. Among the criteria they use are “verifiability” and “falsifiability” In
Sve nt sor thee eg

be a way to demonstrate its truth or falsehood. In the natural sciences, if someone
to havea hypothesis but nothing would count as evidence for or against, then it

really be a hypothesis. It would be meaningless as a claim. The logical positivists extended
this criterion beyond science to claims in philosophy and religion.

Applying it to philosophy, they concluded that a number of philosophical
claims are meaningless. The position called Materialism — that material is

‘one of these statements. And so is Idealism — that everything is made up of minds or ideas.
No possible test could show that either of these positions was fue or false, and so they are
Flew applied the falsfiability test to religious claims. In books such as God and Philosophy
(1966/2005), The Presumption of Atheism (1976), and Atheistic Humanism (1993), he» Y
concludes that many religious statements to say something about God are not”
Scoerernnectcay Wan camel spears \
‘Some religious statements are test ‘so meaningful as assertions. “Jesus rosé from
the dead” is one of them. We can imagine verifying this statement, as by ‘discovering
historical documents proving that Jesus was resurrected. We can also imagine falsifying this
statement, as by discovering histofical documents proving that Jesus’ followers made up the
story of the resurrection. other religious statements cannot be'Verified or falsified,
and these are meaningless a8 assertions, according to Flew. Jews)Chiristians, and Muslims,
for example, often Say that God loves the human race. Indéed, Christians call God our
ining ae Thi nde cin ach mh i hi,“
loving father”"BurSuppose that when you said that Cliveis@ loving father, someone pointed
‘out that when Clive's children all came down with lif stening swine flu he did nothing
abouitit, oven though he had the money and time’ get them to a doctor. If you continue
to insist that Clive is a loving father but you eannot explain his obvious dereliction of
paternal duty, then your claim is not a meanifgful assertion.

Flew applied the same argument to about God's goodness. Throughout history
millions of people have lived miserablé'ives plagued by disease and poverty that could have
been prevented by an all-powerfill Being. According to UNESCO, 35,000 children starve to
death each day. The person whip Continues to insist that “God is a loving father,” despite the
clear evidence to the contrary, is describing a fiction she has chosen to believe, rather than
making a meaningful atsertion, Flew says. Meaningful assertions are revisable in light of
evidence, so that if Gertain things happened, we would deny what we now assert. Flew’s
question to religiots believers is, “What would have to occur or to have occurred to constitute

~]

REUGIOUS STUDIES IN THE 20TH CENTURY


--- Page 3 ---
for you a disproof of the love of, or even the existence of, God?” (Flew 1955, 99) If the
answer is, “Nothing,” Flew says, then their statements about God are meaningless as
assertions. At best, these statements simply express comforting ideas that religious believers
choose to maintain for reasons unacceptable to analytic philosophers.

It should be noted that Flew’s rejection of claims about the existence of a loving father
God did not preclude his belie in God. Following the dictates of reason, he came in his later
years to believe that there is sufficient scientific evidence to support claims for the existence
of God as the purposeful creator of our magnificently complex cosmos.

Phenomenology and Religious Studies

Not all philosophers limited valid claims to those that can be verified and falsified. Some
looked at the distinction between noumena (things as\they are in themselves) and
phenomena (things as they appear to us) and proposed of study that focuses on
phenomena. They called this study phenomenology.

Edmund Husserl (d, 1938) is usually regarded) ither of phenomenology. Rather
than limit philosophy to things that are ifiable, as the logical positivists di
Husserl believed that philosophy should, itself with subjective things — those this
that are functions of human consci and memory and intentiomate all

considered subjective phenomena and worthy of study.

But how can subjective phenomena be studied systematically? Husser! pi
method: bracketing. When we stiidy phenomena, he said, we pay careful
appears to us or is described to us, but we should not ask whether it is teal or true beyond
‘our experience of it. We: questions “in brackets,” ignoring them for the purposes of
our study. ”

‘This method of carefully describing how things appear anid hot asking what is objectively
true has becomea dominant method in Religious Studies =s0™uch so that phenomenology
of religion My Jecome a special Kind of phenomena yy”

Rudolf Otto (d. 1937) ) .

Early gepresentatives of phenomenology of ‘éligion focused on identifying phenomena
with religious experience. Rudolf Otto went beyond describing to asserting that

religious experience has a unique

Otto was deeply influenced bythe German theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher
(d. 1834). Schleiermacher the source of religion as a powerful feeling of
dependence people have on something infinitely greater than themselves. Worship is
their response to this fe It is the acknowledgment that everything they are comes
from the divine. In his groundbreaking 1917 work, The Holy: On the Irrational in the Idea
of the Divine andlts' Relation to the Rational, Otto describes the source of religion as
encounter withthe Holy.”

‘The ; Something we feel rather than something we understand. Our experience of
the Holy, he says, is a “non-rational, non-sensory experience or feeling whose primary and
imm object is outside the self” To analyze the experience of the Holy, he describes
bait Yt feels like. He invents a new term for the object of this experience. He calls it the
~)

PART | THE TOOLS

--- Page 4 ---
numinous,and analyzes the numinous as something that, when experienced, evokes feelings
of frightening and fascinating mystery. His Latin phrase is mysterium tremendum et fascinans.

Religious experience, Otto says, is negative and positive at the same time. There is awe
and fear in it, but also attraction and fascination. It is beyond the experience called sublime,
the sense of awe and wonder that one might feel when viewing a huge waterfall or a stunning
work of architecture. Experiencing the Holy makes one feel utterly insignificant in the face
of the Infinite, as when Abraham addresses God with the words, “Let me take it upon myself
to speak to the Lord, I who am but dust and ashes.” (Genesis 18:27)

Otto calls this sense of utter dependence “creature consciousness.” “It is the emotion of a
creature, submerged and overwhelmed by its own nothingness in contrast to that'which is
supreme above all creatures.” (Otto 1958, 8-11) There are phenomenologists who donot
concern themselves with whether or not the “religious experience” is cansed by some
transcendent reality, but Otto was convinced that religion is the huifian response to
encounters with the ultimate reality, the Divine.

It is interesting to note here the drift away from using terms specific to one religious
tradition in identifying the source of religious experience. Phenomentologists tend to use
terms such as the Holy, the Sacred, Ultimate Reality, and the Divine rather than God. Otto
says the Holy is not “the ‘philosophic’ God of mere
rational speculation, who can be put into a definition?
Rather the source of mysterium tremendum is a force
“which is urgent, active, compelling, and alive.” (Otto
1958, 24). It is common to all religious experiénce,
around the world, and only to religious experiesice. This
is why Otto is called an essentialist.

Mircea Eliade (d. 1986)

The universality of religious experience developed as a
central feature of Religious Studies through the work of
Mircea Eliade. Many people count him as the most
influential scholar of religion in the 20th century. Eliade
was editor of the Encyclopedia of Religion, and as a
professor, at the»University of Chicago he mentored
dozens of young scholars who went on to become
profssors,

He Was also an essentialist. Criticizing pfevailing
views in Religious Studies, he was especially hostile to
reductionism, explanations of religious phenomena that
present them as nothing more than social, psychological,
or economic phenomena. Against such thinkers as
Durkheim, Freud, and Marx, Bliade insisted that religion
is a distinct and unique phenomenon (sui generis). It
reflects not merely, the psychological and social

dimensions of life, but another dimension — the Sacred. FIGURE 4.2 Mircea Eliade. Michael Mauney/Time & Life

So religion shoulébbe explained “on its own terms,” and AturevGety mages

REUGIOUS STUDIES IN THE 20TH CENTURY

a

--- Page 5 ---
not be “explained away” as some other kind of phenomenon. Any reductionist explanation
of religion, Eliade said, “is false; it misses the one unique and irreducible element in it—the
element of the sacred.” (Eliade 1963, xii)

In applying a phenomenological approach, Eliade proceeded historically. Rather than
simply describing the current phenomena, he traced various manifestations of the Sacred
throughout history. For this reason, his methodology is known as History of Religions
(or HR).

His primary interest was in older, nature-based religions, the kind that are often called
“archaic.” He thought that these ancient traditions show the essence of religion that lies
deep within all traditions. Unlike the historically based traditions of monotheism,
which identify manifestations of the Sacred in specific times and ‘archaic religions
treat the Sacred as in a special realm outside of history.

In The Sacred and the Profane (1957), Eliade says that the Sacred and the profane are
different planes of existence. The profane is our ordinary, world/of physical objects in space
and time. The Sacred lies outside of ordinary time and spate; itis eternal and transcends the
ordinary world described by history and science,
of events occurring in a special time not recordad by clocks and calendars. The aborigi
peoples of Australia call it “Dream Timel astrophysicist Carl Sagan (4°1996),
quoting 4th-century philosopher Sallustius, calls myths “things which never happetied but
always are.” (Sagan 1977, 8) y

Religious myths help people hake sense of their lives and deal withilifé’s problems.
People connect themselvesiwith miyths by attending to hierophanies ~ tions of the
Sacred in our world —and they perform rituals to reenact sacred events, However, for Eliade,
rituals do not just imi ‘events; they are not merely symb6lic of events that were
important in the past. Rituals allow people to transcend thé-érdinary world to actually
participate in events themselves over and over, #ecording to Eliade.

As Eliade ic hundreds of myths in the world’seligions, he identified a number of
patterns. and growth are important to peOple around the world, for example, and
ers ic things grew. Some archaic religions

an

venergte an actual tree as the great cosmic say that itis the center of the universe,
myth found in many cultures isthe story of how the human race started out in
a paradise but then “fell” from that, ideal state into the world we see today. A major
motivation in religion, Eliade said, iw to return to that original golden age, and so many
religions have savior figures whO*tescue human beings from their fallen state and bring
them to paradise. Again, Bliade’s viewpoint, these stories reflect awareness of the dual
planes of existence, and thehuman urge to transcend the profane and live in the presence
of the Sacred. Even in the “historical” traditions, Eliade says, there is a sense of sacred time
in rituals such asthe Passover Seder, which reenacts the Hebrew people’s escape from
enslavement in'EgVpt; the Sacrifice of the Mass, which reenacts Jesus’ death on the cross in
payment for)himan sinfulness; and Eid al-Adha, the Islamic festival commemorating
Abraham'Swillingness to sacrifice his son when God told him to.
ing to Eliade, religious myths and symbols reflect the deepest concerns of human
beifigs, and so the Sacred is the most important dimension of human life. If we adopt the
)

PART | THE TOOLS

--- Page 6 ---
ordinary attitudes of Western culture since the Enlightenment, we may think of science and
history as telling us the way things “really are.” But actually, Eliade says, the Sacred is more
real than everyday things and events. In order to appreciate the Sacred, we have to go beyond
our ordinary thinking, especially its linear sense of time and its commitment to logic.
Religious thought works with symbols, metaphors, and imagination, not with rational
assertions, It is more like aesthetic experience, the thinking in poetry, music, and painting,
than the thinking in science or engineering.

People living with modern technology in big cities have largely lost a sense of the Sacred,
Eliade thinks, even if they say they are religious. They are hungry forthe deep meaningfulness
that the Sacred confers on life, especially the shared emotions with their that
religious rituals evoke. And almost as if he were prescribing a cure for the modern seni of
alienation, he insists that people will never find satisfaction without it, This is because he
believes that all people, by nature, seek the Sacred. As he put it, hn are naturally
“religious” — homo religiosus. Eliade’s views remain highly influential but, agWe shall see in
Chapter 10, his claims about homo religiosus have come under serious etitici

Philosophy of Religi

Not all modern philosophers who are concerned with religion practice analytic philosophy

or phenomenology. Some examine the credibility of religious laims. They practice the kind?
of philosophical theology traditionally known)as philosophy of religion. Ss
Christian origins, philosophy of religion is almost exclusively by

thinkers, John Hick and William Lane Craig are examples.

Y

John Hick (b. 1922). Onl

John Hick, an ordained minister with a Ph.D. in philosophy from Oxford, has
spent decades analyzing ideas philosophically. An is his critique of the
standard Christian that Jesus died for our sins, in aboot chapter titled “Atonement
by the Blood of Jesus?” (Hick 1993) Like Thomas Aquit ‘Hick starts with a question. He
asks whether al Christian doctrine of it makes sense today.

this doctrine Jem death on the Gag pA the penalty owed bythe human
race! for Original Sin, In Hick’s words, -».
eo

The basic notion is ... that salvation,
requires an adequate atonement to

God's forgiveness and that this in turn
the divine righteousness and/or justice. This
to making a payment to wipe out a debt or

Hick points out that the’doctrine of the atonement originated around 1100 when

Anselm of Canterbury wrote his book Why Did God Become Man? Before Anselm, Christians

had other ways of. ‘what the death of Jesus had accomplished. As we shall see in

Chapter 6, according to a popular view, the human race became the property of Satan after
)

REUGIOUS STUDIES IN THE 20TH CENTURY

