
--- Page 1 ---
‘The number of Christians worldwide is about 2.1 billion, making Christianity the largest
religion. In different parts of the world, the power and influence of Christian churches
varies considerably. In Britain and Western Europe, people's identification with churches
and attendance at rituals have dropped considerably in the last century. In the U.S.,
evangelical Protestant churches have grown in numbers and strength each year, as traditional
Protestant churches such as the Lutherans and Methodists have lost members. The largest
increase in church membership is taking place in the developing world - especially in
Africa - where 23,000 people a day join a Christian church.

‘The largest Christian denomination is Catholicism, with 1.1 billion members ~ half of
all Christians and one-sixth of the world’s population. Although usually id
the “Latin Rite” ~ the rituals familiar to European and American Catholics ~ the

Church includes 22 Eastern rites too, such as the Coptic Catholic rite that originated
in Egypt.

Core Teachings

‘The history of Islam is, in the Islamic. , the history of monotheism. Tiga
core assumption in Islamic seri the Qur'an (“Koran” in archaic, spelling).
The Qur'an refers to the stories off ‘and Eve, Noah and the flood, Abrahasfi and the
covenant, Moses and the ‘Torah, Jesus and the Gospels, and many other'pfophets and
figures from the Hebrew Bibl the Christian New Testament, but) ‘not tell the
stories in detail or evetiin, chronological order. Instead, the says that it is
reminding people ofthese stories. These stories comprise the! tothe messages
conveyed in the Qur’an. They are part of the history of munity of those who
believe in the one ahd only God. The term for “god” in Atabic, which is the language
of the Qur’ 1. The Qur'an refers to God as, god,” al-ilah or Allah, saying
repeat it “there is no god but God.” God human beings and immediately

jicating with them about how successfully and fulfill the purpose
for they were created. All human fare called upon to submit to the will of
God by establishing justice. In doing so, the) will be following the din, the term used by
the Qur'an to summarize the core of ' onotheistic tradition.

‘We have seen that the Hebrew Bible uses the same term. This is not surprising, since
Hebrew and Arabic are cl Semitic languages. What is perhaps surprising,
though, is that neither the Bible nor the Qur'an uses a term that translates easily
into the English term “religion.” As we saw in Chapter 1, din in both Hebrew and Arabic
means “judgment” — in particular, divine judgment.

Human beings will all be judged on the Last Day, the yom al-din, “the day of judgment.”
And all people ar€called upon to make their own decisions in light of that reality. So din is

~)

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS

--- Page 2 ---
FIGURE 6.12 Indian Muslims praying. Fredric Renanded/Alamy

like justice; itis both the goal or purpose of human existence, and thé means of achieving
it. People are called japon, 16 live in accordance with the “true din? the din of Abraham and
of all prophets, They all lived their lives and made their decisiorts based upon ~ in Islamic
terminology, “in sbmission to” — the will of God. The terafor “submission (to the will of
God}” in Arabic is islam. Therefore, the Qur'an says, that islam is the true din. When
‘translated into English, this becomes “Islam is the trut religion.” (Qur'an 3:19) However, it
is important to understand that, from the perspective of the Qur’an, this does not mean
Se ee

(Otheistic (or Abrahamic) tradition, Th€ message brought in the 7th century ce by
Muhammad, the prophet of Islam, confirmed the messages of earlier messengers, corrected
some misinterpretations of those*earlier messages, and completed or finalized the
transmission of messages from God to humanity.

Muslims refer to their ptophet as Prophet Muhammad and, in order to show respect,
add the blessing “Peace be,npon him” (PBUH or, more correctly, “The peace and blessings
of God be upon him,” iti Arabic abbreviated as SAW). However, Muhammad is actually
considered the lastiof the prophets of Islam, not the first. Muslims consider Adam to be the
first prophet of tile Din. The Qur'an mentions Adam 25 times, referring to human beings
asthe “children of Adam.” Adam is considered a prophet because through him God delivered
a message'to humanity, Human beings are the creatures of God, created to be stewards, his
delegates on the earth. The term used for steward is khalifah. (In English this becomes
“caliph.” This term is later politicized, as imperial rulers take upon themselves the

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 3 ---
FIGURE 6.13 A page from a — “2

Y
responsibility to be divine stewards or to be obeyed by everyone else,. \4
the term khalifah often is to Prophet Muhammad, sinceshe caliphs
took over leadership of the Community after Muhammad died, but thiftranslation is
misleading when applied to ‘enk use of the term haf) Zig Crention is the
beginning point of the traced in the Qur'an. \
The Qur'an, the ulti Sere dsitrcmater ey terbotpbreat

record of the sereby Cod ohemeniy GO Muhammad. It
was memorized: of it were written down during} ne of Prophet Muhammad
(570-632,ci it was recorded and canonized (putintto official form) within twenty
years of ’s death. Muslims are thi confident that it is free of error
(i Arabic form — and it is consi be truly the Qur’an only in Arabic.

said and did many ‘were not considered to be revelation
and are therefore not recorded in the However, they are nonetheless considered
important, often complementary to ‘an. Reports of these words and deeds are called
hadiths. The hadith reports ci ‘the Muslim community in oral form for two

to three centuries but were scrutinized for authenticity, and codified. There
three of which are considered to be quite reliable

(two for Sunni Muslims for Shi'i Muslims [see below]). Taken together, the hadith

reports comprise set by Muhammad to guide Muslims in their efforts to
implement the message of the Qur'an. This example is called the Suna. The Quran and
the Sunna are the'foundational sources for Islam.

o

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS


--- Page 4 ---
Muslims believe that the Qur’an’s message is meant for all humankind, but it was
addressed specifically to the community in the environs of Mecca and Medina in Arabia
(now Saudi Arabia) in which it was delivered. That community was organized into tribes —
some of which were settled in oasis towns, and some of which were nomadic ~ and included
Jewish tribes, Christian tribes, and tribes devoted to specific lesser gods (gods that were
recognized as patrons to their tribes but who were not universal; they were one among
many). The people of Mecca and Medina were also familiar with other traditions, such as
that of the Sabeans of southern Arabia (now Yemen), known also as Sheba, whose queen is
associated with the story of Solomon in both the Hebrew Bible and the Qur'an. The Qur'an
addresses itself to people who represent all these traditions, jing they have
received true revelation, but challenging some of their interpretations as Well as their failure
to live in accordance with the guidance they have been given.

This multi-religious region provides the context for thé Qur'an’s unique orientation

toward other religious communities. Instead of them, it addresses what it
considers their misinterpretations of the revelation they have received from earlier prophets,
and offers correctives. The Jews, it says, mi that the Torah was meant for
them alone. The Qur'an rejects the notion of a people” and affirms that

messages received through Abraham, Moses, aiid the other prophets are meant
humanity (5:18-19). Muslims also beli ‘the son involved in the story of.
sacrifice was Ismail (Ishmael), rather than Isaac, but this is not considered a maj
Both Jews and Christians are riticized for rejecting each other as true
though they both claim to if the same God (2:113). The
Christian belief that God! and that Jesus was the result, the Qur'an
teaches that Jesus was a prophet and the Messiah (although itidoes not specify what
that term means), is ‘Mary was miraculously a virgineven in childbirth, but
Jesus was hi ‘other prophets (5:17). Nor did the Jews crucify Jesus, the Qur’an
says, even, appeared as if he had been 157). Likewise, the Qur'an
rejects the idea of the Trinity, stressing the importance’ that there is only one
god ( ).

of all these correctives is to guide le in true belief on the assumption

that 1g the truth and living are integrally related. In the Quranic

the virtuous actions req) reward in the afterlife result from true belief.
‘The Qur'an characteristically menti deeds and true belief in tandem. However, at
the same time, the Qur'an does for a single religious community. The Qur'an says

that all people have been given, laws and rituals (5:48); this s considered part of the
divine plan. God created people in different communities so that they could learn from one
another. The Qur'an saySithere can be no compulsion in matters of the Din (2:256). Rather,
peoples of various should come together in agreement (3:64), and compete
with one another works (5:48).
Good works gf, therefore, the focus of the Quran's teachings. The clearest indicator
that commfities have failed to implement the teachings ofthe earlier prophets is the social
that Muhammad sees all around him: rampant poverty, wealth controlled by a
privileged and greedy few, widows and orphans exploited, women treated as property and
disfespected to the extent that girls were often killed at birth because they were considered
~)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 5 ---
an economic burden. So the Qur’an continually reminds people of the teachings of the
‘Torah and the Gospels, and places the measure of piety in the treatment of others:

Goodness does not consist in turning your faces towards the East or West (in prayer].
The truly good are those who believe in God and the Last Day, in the angels, Scripture,
and the prophets; who give away some of their wealth, however much they cherish it, to
their relatives, to orphans, the needy, travelers and beggars, and to liberate those in
bondage; those who keep up the prayer and give charity; who keep promises when they
make them; who are steadfast in misfortune, adversity, and times of danger. These are
the ones who are true, and it is they who are aware of God. (2:17)

However, the core of Islamic teaching is monotheism. The Arabic term tawhid means
that there is only one God, and that God is unitary, rather than a Trinity. This emphasis on

monotheism is found in what is called the first “pillar” of Islam, the The Shahada
is literally a “bearing witness.” It is conveyed in the vow, “I bear wit there is no god
but God and Muhammad is the Messenger of God.”

‘The significance of the Shahada goes beyond mere belief It entails committing

oneself to demonstrating one's belief in actions, actions tha? are intended to carry out

(or “submit to") the will of God. The importance Second half of the Shahada, )

...Muhammad is the Messenger of God," is that Muhammad brought the Qur'an, which

guides believers in their efforts to cary outhe divine will S the Shahada commits a> aa

person to working to establish the kind of envisioned by the Qur'an.

‘As we saw, the Qur’an focuses on demonstrated in actions. In the

worldview, the divine origin of all is to be reflected in the way people tos

another. There is only one God, ‘created all human beings. All people‘ire equal

in the sight of God, and the hi is to create a society that refletts the equality

all people share in the eyes of thelt Creator. This is the reason human beinigs were created ~

as we saw, to be “ ® of God's creation. And this is the which human

beings will be judged.

‘Two terms are it here: intention and effort. The’ promises reward for

those who submit to the divine will, and punishment for tho who reject it. However, the

ergs that this challenge is not meant tobe a burden for human beings.

presents God as ultimately ignate and merciful, always providing

assistance for those who seek it. is expected to single-handedly
Saad een Flare a mn must make the intention (niyyah) and

Ena ieraieig ine judgment, one in history and one at the end
of time. Divine judgment in historyis in the belief that a just society will be strong
and healthy, while an unjust or ve society will eventually be destroyed. The Qur'an
provides numerous familiar such as Sodom and Gomorrah, the communities
warned by Lot to end ways. When they did not, they were destroyed. Individuals
will also be judged on the Last Day. At that time, each will stand alone, with conscience laid
bare and no one to Punishment or reward will be earned on the basis of one’s
intention and effi to contribute to a society that reflects the will of the one God.
~)

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS r*)

--- Page 6 ---
Ce) ‘Aumqua> iS}, 34) Ul Wess] Jo peasds €°9 AVN


--- Page 7 ---
Jihad
The Most Misunderstood Term

The term jihad comes from a verb that means “to exert strenuous

effort.” The Qur'an repeatedly tells people to “struggle in the way of

God,” and the way of God is described as “doing good and preventing
evil.” The Qur'an gives countless examples of how to struggle to do good and
prevent evil. These include being truthful and sincere, generous, responsible, and
hard-working. In certain circumstances, the struggle may be military.
community is under attack, military jihad may be called for. The community

question need not be one’s own; most Muslim authorities believe that military
jihad is not exclusively for self-defense. Defense of another may
require it. However, Islamic law strictly controls military jiha ‘only be
called by a duly constituted government, it may only be waged with due warning
and after efforts to settle the conflict peacefully, tants must be
protected, buildings and natural resources must not be attacked, and if the
enemy requests peace it must be declared.

For these reasons, terrorists attacks such as been condemned by
virtually every Muslim religious authority, publicly and repeatedly. These
condemnations of terror are readily ible on the internet, and have been
compiled by scholar Charles Kurzman at —-=

Many Mains ios HPD incimpviod ber ein
people undergo a kind or “punishment of the grave” ift
grievous offenses ‘This is based not on the Qur'an, however, Wagan
(hadith). Theres also widespread speculation about the:

‘The Qur'an the afterlife in graphic detail —

‘See Chapter 9.)
the Qur'an’s commitment to justice. This
within the family and extending to society at
so the Qur'an teaches that families must be based
Sex is restricted to married couples, in order to protect,
the family unit. Modesty is tequired of females and males, and extra-marital sex is severely
punished. (False of extra-marital sex are also severely punished; according to
Islamic law, four adit male Muslim witnesses must be produced in order to prove an
alee gp eres be rca rh mileiie ten ml)

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS

--- Page 8 ---
Marriage is a solemn commitment in Islam. Among the many reforms instituted by the
‘Qur'an was prohibition of buying and selling wives; the “bride price” or dowry is required
to be given to the bride herself, rather than to her family. The unlimited polygyny (multiple
wives) of pre-Islamic times is limited. The Qur'an advises that marrying one woman is
best, but allows men to marry up to four, if that is necessary in order to protect orphans
and provided the wives are treated equitably. Divorce is discouraged, and the Qur'an
recommends reconciliation efforts in troubled marriages. However, if reconciliation efforts
fail, then divorce is permitted and men are advised to provide what support they can for the
divorced wife, Men are responsible for the support of their offspring. Women are required to
wait to make sure they are not pregnant before remarrying, again, for the sake of protecting
offspring. Children and spouses ~ including females ~ are guaranteed shares.

As noted above, Islamic values are worked out in greatest detail in Islamic law, Sharia.
Sharia is like Judaic law, in that it attempts to guide every aspect of life through the ages. As
such, it includes the requirements and prohibitions found in th€ Qur'an, but it also includes
human efforts to interpret Qur’anic values for ci not specifically covered in the
Qur'an. While Shariah in general is considered inely inspired law and therefore
perfect and unchanging, the human interp of Sharia are subject to
discussion and revision. This discussion is \n by highly trained scholars, who»
guided by the maqasid or goals of is a great deal of disagreement ariong
scholars about many of the details of human interpretations of Sharia. However, all agree
that the goals of Sharia are the preservation and protection of life, religion, familY, property,
and reason (or human dij ‘These magasid guide interpretatiops of specific
manifestations of Islamic ng in diverse contexts. \

Early Hi Life of Muhammad ) ”

and theRashidun Caliphs

Prophet mesnasienirenistd Prectientipam toms
skilled and trader. At around age 40 he felt the religious call and began to preach
pecs: nated with the impoverished masses
and

with a few of the wealthy most of the wealthy people felt
by his call for social justice. They therefore boycotted and persecuted the Prophet
and his followers. However, the ‘of the message continued to spread.

In 622 ce Muhammad was i to accept an invitation to move to Medina, a city
‘some 200 miles north of Mecta."Phis emigration (hijra) became the turning point in the
young community’s life, so tauth so that it marks the beginning of the Islamic calendar. It
marks the transition eats te Earaa tebetne aie eco

(islam) to actually institutions designed to promote and protect social justice.
‘The Prophet i itely established a constitution whereby all the clans and tribes of,
Medina and would form a single community. Each would retain authority

to deal with intemal matters, but all would join in mutual defense ifthe town were attacked.
the constitution identified Muslim, Jewish, and polytheistic clansas signatories

to the and guaranteed religious freedom for all. Any disputes between groups

wilde refered to Muhammad who, with divine guidance, would sete them.

~)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 9 ---
Muslims and Jews

Some of the people who collaborated with the Meccans against
Muhammad's community in Medina were members of Jewish tribes. As
2 result of the collaboration, these tribes were evicted from Medina. In
‘one case, the men of the tribe were executed and the women and
children were made slaves. Despite the fact that other Jewish tribes continued to
live in peace among Muslims, some people have interpreted these early battles as
‘evidence of anti-Semitism in Islam.

Muslims reject this claim, demonstrating that throughout history Islamic y
has guaranteed religious freedom and Jews have lived in Muslim lands in peace
and security. Yet current political conflicts in the Middle East
some Muslims to express anti-Jewish views. The best known is
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, who has publidy denied the Holocausty Many Muslim
leaders therefore struggle to reaffirm Islam's commit ious pluralism,
Eboo Patel, Muslim community leader and founder of the Interfaith Youth Core
in Chicago, says that anti-Jewish statements “blacken the heart of anyone who
says or thinks or feels them, and | want my reli ty to have nothing
todo with those sick attitudes.” Shaykh Hamza Yusuf, one of the most prominent
young American Muslim leaders, that Holocaust denial undermines
Islam, Patel reports that the voices of as Shaykh Hamza “are having
an increasing influence within the Aimericd Muslim community for a very sit
reason - they reflect the attitude of the majority of American Musii
have felt both sickened, and by the minority of Muslims who,sBeak of
ant-Semitismasifitwereatcore tenet of slam.” (httpi/newsweek washingtonpost.
comvonfaith/eboo pate /09/on_musimn_antsemitsm.him))

y

cities established a truce, and in 630, the
and accepted the leadership of Muhammad.
licatéd the ancient sanctuary at its center, the Kaaba, to

Allah, and from then on Mecea religious center of the Muslim world.

Medina continued to be the Political capital briefly, but disputes over leadership after
Prophet Muhammad died'jn 632 led to political changes. Muslims consider Muhammad
the final prophet, but\some members of the community believed leadership of the
community should femain in the Prophet’ family. Muhammad died leaving no sons; the
hn PS eB coe ed seri ATR nary of Mins en

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS 8

--- Page 10 ---
‘Muhammad's elder companions Abu Bakr, Umar, and then Uthman. Each of them governed
the community in turn, but not without conflict. Abu Bakr had to contend with tribes that
refused to pay their taxes once Muhammad died. Umar was highly respected and effective,
and led the expansion of Islamic sovereignty into areas previously controlled by the Roman
and Persian empires. However, he was attacked and killed by a slave. Uthman continued the
expansion of Islamic sovereignty, but he was criticized for excessive control over the
provinces, and assassinated by disgruntled Egyptians in 656. The community then chose Ali
to be their leader, as his supporters (shi’ah) believed he should rightfully have been all
along. However, Ali, too, was killed in a battle with the governor of Syria, in 661, who
declared himself successor to the Prophet. y

The Dynastic Caliphates

‘The death of Ali marks the end of period when the Muslim coffimunity was led by “rightly
guided” successors to Prophet Muhammad (Rashidun). The Syrian governor's family, the
Umayyads, then established Damascus as the political/capital of the Muslim world and
maintained leadership of the Muslim communi ic-style, for nearly 90 years.

‘Umayyads were highly successful in expanding their sovereignty, all the way to Spain im

West and Central Asia, and northwest the East. However, by this time, the'rtilers
‘were no longer considered or even expected to be pious. In fact, they alienated endugh of
their subjects that they were overthrown in a revolution in 750, which brough* th another

dynastic caliphate, the Abbasid Y
‘The Abbasids built Baghdad as their capital and maintained at least HofSinal sovereignty
until 1258. However, Spain remained autonomous, and many other provinces were virtually
independent of the capital Nevertheless, the dynastic caliphates. enormous wealth

and maintained relative stability over vast expanses of territory. This wealth and stability
allowed the flowering of a magnificent culture that bt together the greatest scholars
and artists from across the globe. Building upon the\hetitage of classical Greek, Roman,
African, Indian, and Chinese cultures, they developed the highest levels of

tical and scientific knowledge the world had known, and a material culture that
‘was the envy of their contemporaries. Evens Charlemagne, crowned Holy Roman Emperor

Leo III in 800, corresponded withthe Abbasid caliph Harun al-Rashid (4. 809) in
Baghdad, requesting an alliance. ted the idea but did maintain friendly relations
with the European ruler. He sent ficent gifts - including carved ivory, a pitcher
and tray made of gold, perfumes, beautiful fabric, a robe embroidered with “There is no god
but God” in Arabic, and an orriate water clock with twelve carved figures that came out of
little windows and brass balls that fell on cymbals to mark the hours. Some of these gifts are

on display in ‘museums. Perhaps the most stunning gift — the elephant that
Charlemagne — is not; it died after several cold winters in Charlemagne’s
Germanic capital

Ys and Charlemagne’s successors would eventually become mortal
‘enemies, By the end of the 11th century, Europe was feeling threatened by the expansive
MGB seine: Pops Uehes I lel x sets sr to le a Hay Len of
ke back from the Muslims, who were declared infidels. This was the beginning of the
)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD REUGIONS
