
--- Page 1 ---
A belief in all-pervading spiritual
agencies seems to be universal.

CHARLES DARWIN

Y

i Prehistoric Religions?
Overview 2.
Animism and Anthropomorphism
Our species, Homo sapiens, has existed for about i pes
years. For most of that time, they lived as hunters and eadesderaire
Ler Hunting Rituals,
Shamans
© Archaeological evidence suggests that erly haters had Ancient Traditions, Oral Traditions,
an intimate knowledge of the ani ate and the and Religion
° Lmeona! er As ene The Neaiithic Revolution and the
Some scholars say. Ta Rise of Historic Religions
carly humans to animism 2the tendency to think of
everything that moveSas ali @inclusion

Y

alive.
A aah Taper pereee X
were sensitive ‘human agents, who also might _(\.),
benefit them or harm them. ~

i me scholars, that sensitivity to hi

agents led to ee.
‘of humans to think of other things!
humans.

\

© Animism and anthropomorphism help explain the
development of religion, because beifigs like us tend to
perceive events in nature, such a8 thunderstorms, as the
actions of agents. And so early humans might have
believed in agents other than living human beings, such

as spirits, ghosts,
© Thinking of nati ts as coming from agents
allowed early hyjmans to feel that they could influence
)


--- Page 2 ---
such natural forces as the rain and the sun, sickness and health. They could do this by

persuading these agents to help them, as by sacrificing something of value.

In the Upper Paleolithic period (10,000-35,000 years ago), we find considerable

archaeological evidence of activities that can be called religious. Most of them involved

death, hunting, or fertility, all major concerns of early human beings.

© Early death rituals indicate a belie that humans survive death and need food and tools

in the next life.

‘There is evidence of the concern of early humans with fertility in about 200 figurines

made between 20,000 and 27,000 years ago. They have large breast, wide hips and

prominent vulvas. Some scholars say that they served as “fertility

© ‘The concer of early humans with prey animals and with predators shows up in several
European caves where between 11,000 and 30,000 years ago early artists drew detailed
images of bison, bulls, and other animals.

© A few images from caves seem to represent figures that are part animal and part
human, something like the shamans in various religins later on.

© The animism and anthropomorphism of oral tribal cultures today may be similar“)
to the thinking of early humans. <)

About 12000 cx, sme human groupe made the transon fom hunting and ering

to agriculture and herding. This is called the Neolithic Revolution.

. aan te ~vramnpuriaeinie NIN
ability to fight did too From land ownership and war, some scholasay, came empires,
slavery, and men’s domination of women. .

© From the time of theledfliest empires and states, governmentahd Feligion have been linked.

While several featites of early human cultures, like ‘of oral tribal cultures today,

be daa lon seem to lack some basic
distinctions tRat are made by religions. Those i distinctions between natural and
sacred and profane/seculr, and religiols/non-rligios.

isa wadioal Goel ng ej ON Tine Ron” The ft ene “Ge me

that old-time religion. Give me that old-time religion. Give me that old-time religion. It's
‘good enough for me.” The kind of religion referred to is Evangelical Protestantism, which
‘goes back almost three centuries: But what if we wanted to find really old-time religion?

Our species, Homo sapien, has been around for 150,000 years. But the oldest
institutionalized religi have today, Hinduism and Judaism, were created only three
to six thousand years ag®. According to the Jewish calendar, 2011 ce is year 5771, and the
Hindu calendar piits it at 5112, but that leaves about 97% of human history unaccounted
for. However; mafly scholars of religion — especially essentialists such as Otto and Eliade
(see Chapters) — believe that religion is an “essential” aspect of human life. If this is the
case, then)it should be evident even in the earliest societies. So they look at evidence of
carlierfhuman activity that might be called religious. They look at objects and images that
early] made, and figure out if they might have had religious significance.
~)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD REUGIONS

--- Page 3 ---
Calendars

Many ethnic groups have traditions that explain the origins of their
world and their group. Many also date their history from this beginning
point. Many peoples’ calendars have fallen into disuse and been lost
to history. But there are still more than 40 calendars in use worldwide.

The Christian calendar begins with the birth of Jesus, and is known as anno
domini (ao), “year of the Lord.” It uses “ac” to refer to the time before Jesus was
bom. ("sc" refers to “before Christ.”) Since the Christian calendar is the

widely used calendar today, its dates are often referred to by schoancon iY
era” dates (:),

Prehistoric Reli

eens OS nearer
depict what modern Western observers identify as religious ritual. About 17,000 years ago, for
example, our distant ancestors created images such as those in Figure 5.2 in caves in Lascaux?
France. There are over 2,000 images on the: ‘caves: 600 are drawn or painted,
1,500 are engraved into walls. To make some of the images on the ceilings, ists Sy,
the painters must have climbed, up on ing. Of the figures represented, thé most
common are horses — 364 of them): — 90 of them. There is only one repreSentation
of a human. The most famous figures are four huge bulls, one 17 feet long.” “=
What can we say about like these? One thing they show isithaf early humans
knew well the shape of 1¢, animals. They were familiar with luscles, horns, and
other body featites. This en eos
features, and them move. This makes sense since at this time our ancestors lived
not by farming, but By hunting and gathering food. To be slecéssful at killing prey, they had
toknoww! species looked like and how they moved, where their most vulnerable
points were, and how they defended themselves. would track animals, sometimes
for ing out their movements from as footprints and odors. And when
they closed in for the kill, they had to attune their movements to the animals, to prevent it
from escaping. With large prey, such as biill and bison, they had to respond quickly to the
animal's aggressive movements or they'would be gored or trampled. To do all this, they had
to be sensitive to the animal's every,
Another reason that early huffign had to be sensitive to animals is that the animals also
hunted them. Imagine what it Waélke for early humans living on the East African grasslandsto
sleep on the ground at night} bylions, leopards, and hyenas. They had to be alert to
every rustle in the grass and every sound that might be coming from a predator's throat. Quieter,
smaller threats from’ yus snakes and spiders were common, too. Our first ancestors, in
short, had to pay élose attention to what they might kill, and to what might kill them.

)

EARLY TRADITIONS

G

a

--- Page 4 ---
FIGURE 5.2 Caves in Lascaux, France, eiphCnonston!

SuperStock v
Y ) ”
a and Anthropomorphism
Sensitivity to animals, some scholarsisa¥, led early humans to animism, which, as we
saw in Chapter 3 in our discussion of E.B. Tylor, is the tendency to see everything that
moves as somehow alive. Anim¢ is, Greek for “soul”; it is the term that gives us our words
“animate” and “animal” Animism was a survival strategy for the first humans.
Understandably, under the ts ces it was safest to assume that, if something moves,
itis either a predator or prey, unless you know otherwise. Treat all movements as coming
from “agents” — living things that see you and can hurt you or benefit you. People who
thought this way Weré perhaps a little paranoid, but, with dangerous animals all around,
paranoia could'be'a good survival strategy.

Adding t6'¢afly humans’ sensitivity to animals was their sensitivity to other people - who
also jurt them or help them. Until a few thousand years ago, everybody lived in
tribes,Jas many people still do. Human babies then, as now, were utterly helpless and
comtipletely dependent on other people to survive — first their mother, then their family,
S)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD REGIONS

--- Page 5 ---
then the wider social group. So they quickly learned to
distinguish their mother’s face, and voice, from everyone
clse’s. As they grew, they learned which faces were in
their tribe and which were not, and which were friendly
and which dangerous.

A large part of the right brain of humans - the part of
thebrain that deals primarily with visual, audio, and spatial
recognition and manipulation — is devoted to identifying
faces. Infact, because we are so attuned to faces, we tend to
sce them everywhere — not just on people. In Figure 5.3 is
a rock formation on Mars in which people have “seen” a
human face.

This hypersensitivity to other humans led to another
ism, anthropomorphism — the tendency to see things as
human. The word is from the Greek anthropos, human
being, and morphé, shape. The roots of anthropomorphism
probably go back long before our ancestors were Homo
sapiens. Three million years ago in southern Aftica,
pre-human members of the group Australopithecus:
weighed only about fifty pounds as adults, and had brains
about one-quarter the size of ours. Archaeologists
discovered in one of their camps a small reddishbfown .
jasper stone (Figure 5.5) that was from anatfea several miles
away. Apparently, an Australopithecus had picked up this
stone and carried it to a camp milesjaway’ We cannot say GYRE 5.3. Face|in tock ~ Mars. © 1989 Roger
for sure what they were thinkingsbut it seems plausible that possmeyesNASAVGO%D4
they brought it home because it lodked as if it had a face.

‘What, if anything, dO\animism and anthropomorphism haye\t0”do with religion?
Contemporary psychologist Pascal Boyer, confirming some ofthe theories of early
anthropologists such as Tylor and Frazer, claims that early human’ had a highly sensitive
agency-detection system in their brains. They naturally tendedto perceive any movement as
the action of allivitfg thing — this is the animism. And they.t€nded to think of anything alive
as like themselves ~ this is the anthropomorphism, If tree branches moved suddenly, or
sométhing rustled the grass, or the ground rumbled, they became alert and observed
carefullf. Their muscles might have tensed as they went into a fight-or-flight mode. They
got ready to confront whatever it was, or tg rin away from it. Anyone who has slept alone
in a creaky old house during a storm, with the wind making weird noises and lightning
casting strange shadows on the walls"and ceiling, may well have experienced their own
agency-detection system at works, They probably tended to interpret all these movements
and sounds as the actions of a dnimal or person. If that interpretation was right and a rat
or a burglar was coming toward them, then their animism and anthropomorphism paid
off, since they were better prepared to deal with the threat. If, on the other hand, the
disturbance was only a branch brushing against the window, then all they wasted was a

little adrenaline aiid anxiety.


--- Page 6 ---
The Nun Bun

FIGURE 5.4 Nun Bun, Tennessee 1996.

AP ProtaNashvile Ternessearil Stebe.

In 1996 in Nashville, Tennessee, a customeriff the Bongo Java Coffee Shop

noticed that the bun pictured above looked like Mother Teresa. Within a week,

photos of the “Nun Bun” were appearing/in news media around the world, Bob
Bernstein, owner of the shop, had the bun coated with shellac and put ina glass
case. in 2005, someone broke into the shop and stole the bun.

r

FIGURE 5.5 The Makapaniyat cobble/pebble.

© The Natwal History Mustyap London,

Employing aspects of Darwin's theory of natural
selection (see Chapter 3)f thinkers such as Boyer
believe that those eafly humans who were ultra-
sensitive to possible” agents around them survived
longer and prodiiced more offspring than those who
were less sensitive. So over tens of thousands of years
of evolutiofi, our species ended up witha hypersensitive
agency-detection system. This is why we might easily
‘mistake a rock for a bear, but we are much less likely to
mistake a bear for a rock.

This hypersensitive agency-detection system in
early humans naturally led them to look for an agent
whenever anything happened, especially something
important. If someone died suddenly, and no animal
or person had attacked them, early humans might
think that some special kind of agent was at work. That
agent might be a jealous mate who used some special
power to kill them. It might be the ghost (see Chapter 2)
of an angry relative. It might be some cosmic or
supernatural payback for some offense.

--- Page 7 ---
The First Work of Art?

FIGURE 5.6 Rock person, Moroccomober 6. yY
Bednar

y

In 1999 the rock pictured Yd. found in Morocco. Its original shape was
somewhat human, afil00,000 years ago, before Homo sapiens evolved,
someone carved gfooves into it to better define this shapes They also added

ochre, a darkred coloripg, tot. Anthropologists speculate that reshaped
and colored this rock did so because they saw it as like Ives.
J

to attribute bad events to an agerit~ natural or supernatural, mundane or
is still found today in traditional religions “Traditional religions” is what scholars call
itions that are indigenous to areas, continue to be transmitted orally
from one generation to the next, and| spread beyond their native areas. (There are many
traditional religions in Africa and Australia, for example. We shall look at one example of Native
American traditional religions in Ghapter 9.) It is common in traditional religions to treat death
asa result of agency. When sofedne dies, people say that some agent must have killed them.
If no one stabbed or poisoned them, then it may have been someone with extraordinary

power — a witch castingan evil spell, or a spirit getting revenge, or a god or cosmic force

administering justi if their community knows that the person died from pneumonia

or cancer, they stibisk who killed them — killed them by giving them pneumonia or cancer.
‘)

EARLY TRADITIONS

a

--- Page 8 ---
Sacrifice

The first book of the Hebrew Bible tells the story of the frst two children:
Cain and Abel, sons of Adam and Eve. The Qur'an, Islamic sacred
scripture, tells the story as well. The two decide to offer sacrifices to
God. Cain gathers some of his best grain and burns it on an altar. Abel

slaughters a perfect lamb and burns it for God. The smoke from his offering goes

straight up, while the smoke from Cain's offering drifts sideways. Taking it as a
sign that God has rejected his offering, Cain becomes jealous and kills
him. Whether or not offering sacrifices to please a god is au renomenon,
it certainly is @ part of Jewish, Christian, and Islamic tradition. Scholars have
generalized from this example that offering sacrifices is a major feature

to the first religions of the human
of course, but some anthropologists ‘show a basic way of thinking that may have
contributed to the development of religion. If this approach is correct, then i

‘grew out of the natural human)tendency to interpret events as actions, and to Whderstand
actions as motivated by something, just as human actions are motivated by something. When a
volcano rumbled, when ‘when the rain came, our distant’ saw this as

failed to come as: interpreted this as someone's refraining from acting.
This way of thinking not only allowed early humans to explain the world around them,
but also made them feel they had a way to influence ity ‘even control it, As Freud
specie bk The Reon os in 3), human beings early on
‘became skilled in dealing with other people. As they fated problems with the natural world,
they tied to use the same techniques. Ifthe r the rain was someone's action, then
they could ask that someone to stop the ’ start the rain. They could do something,
the one who was performing the, so that this agent would do what was asked.

been because they had failed to please the agent
The next step might be to offer other gifts or sacrifices,
‘orto apologize and ask for forgiveness. By seeing events around them as the actions of persons,
they could deal with the ‘world in all the social ways they dealt with other people.

Death Rituals

Thowe wi Q le sagetons bout the origins of what we undentand ation would
bemuch happier if they could find archaeological evidence for their claims, but, unfortunately,
there 10st no archaeological record of what religions may have been like between
po Taal pares paper oact ay paeoe ra a pee

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD REUGIONS

--- Page 9 ---
years ago, the Upper Paleolithic period. All we have from this long period are some animal
bones arranged in special patterns in human encampments, and some remnants of ochres
(common colors found in the earth) that early humans may have used to decorate their skin.

When we get to the Upper Paleolithic period of 35,000 to 10,000 years ago, however, we
find more archaeological evidence of activities that can be interpreted as religious. Most of
these concerned death, hunting, and human fertility - all major concerns of human beings
trying to survive in a scary and unpredictable world. As we saw in Chapter 2, dealing with
basic concerns is an important part of what religions do for people.

The oldest evidence of actions performed systematically for no obvious practical reason
but with some kind of symbolic significance — what we call rituals comes not froimHomo
sapiens, our species, but from Homo neanderthalensis, or Neandertals, cousins of ourgWho
lived from about 200,000 years ago to about 30,000 years ago. Evidence from caves suggests
that Neandertals had rituals for disposing of dead bodies, some of which were curled up ina
fetal position. One commonly cited Neandertal burial is Shanidar 4, knowns “Old Man,”
in a cave in Iraq. Soil samples show significant amounts of pollen from a wide range of
wildflowers, some having medicinal value. Before he died, he wasDblind ahd partially crippled,
and so he would have needed to be cared for. The suggestion is that his group took care of
him in life, and then covered his body with flowers when he digt.
Just what did these people believe about death and whattdid’they
think their rituals would accomplish? We do not know for sure,
but it is possible that they thought of the dead person as still
existing in some way.

The evidence for funeral rituals gets stronger with our species,
Homo sapiens, about 20,000 years ago. There are almost 100
examples from Europe and Asia ofipeople being buried in caves
and open-air sites, often with "grave goods” — things for them to
use after death — such as stone orbone tools, shells, beads, animal
bones, and red ochre. Orie,male buried in Arena Candide, Italy,
was nicknamed the “Young Prince.” His body was dusted with red
ochre and decorated)with pendants carved from mammoth ivory,
shells, and al9-inch flint blade placed in his left hand. Some bufial
sites had several bédies, perhaps families buried together:

Fertility Goddesses

Another intriguing set of artifacts mad® between 20,000 and
27,000 years ago consists of hundreds\of‘nude female figurines
found across the ancient world. Rangifig from 1.57 inches to 10
inches in height, they typically Haye’ large breasts, wide hips, and
prominent vulvas. The mostyfimous, in Figure 5.7, is called
“Venus of Willendorf” ~after Venus, the Roman goddess of love,
and the town in Austtia near where the figure was found in 1908.

When these figurines were made, food was not abundant. FIGURE 5.7. Venus of Willendort
A long winter or @ few disappointing hunting expeditions could — cara/Atwny,

EARLY TRADITIONS 3


--- Page 10 ---
mean starvation for some or all of the group. So a woman who was as plump as this Venus
‘would have been rare indeed. Rather than representing an actual woman, these statues seem
to represent an ideal type ~ the fertile, probably pregnant, female with a wide pelvis, large
breasts, and plenty of stored body fat. This is the perfect body for bearing and nursing
children. The fact that there are so many of these figures spread over a wide area suggests that
they were made not occasionally and randomly, but often and for a definite purpose. The
‘most likely purpose would have been in rituals to ensure fertility for women in the group.

Hunting Rituals

In the Magdalenian period, 11,000 to 17,000 years ago, we find evi Tituals associated
with hunting, This is the period when the paintings of bulls and bison were done on cave
walls. Some of the animals in the paintings appear to have: stuck in them. In several
caves in Europe, too, bear skulls have been placed in: ions, often along with
bones. Some scholars say that these hunting peoples had bear cults that today might be
called religious. Considering the size of the bears) time, it is easy to see how early
humans, armed only with primitive spears and would find them awesome and.)
perhaps even worship them. Archaeologists tell esha re wi wg
bears, and weighed more than half a ton,

Shamans

1 cy a gh Ma eiy ecg e ik
there are intriguing images on cave walls of characters who are part anighal and part human.
In Figure 5.8 is a age fen Se Ara Yes meni peed
and engraved about 1

Ths gue Havers hea ag eeslike an ocr wo pe ikea bea. all
like a horsejand human feet and penis. There is no evidence that people lived in this cave,

‘oFthat it was tsed on a daily basis, so this image appear to have been just a part of
some tave dwellers decor. The cave seems tO\bavé been a special place used only on
speci jions, like a synagogue, mosqueychuifch, or temple today. Many scholars call this

fe “The Sorcerer,” interpreting it as,aishaman. As we saw in Chapter 2, shamans (or
priests) - those recognized for their skill in influencing agents who have power over people
but over whom we have no direct: appear to be the first authority figures recognized
in human society. Shamans rituals to insure success in hunting and to initiate
young men into the ip Of adult hunters.

‘There are still shamans today. They typically wear special dress and go into altered
mental states. In these special states, they are believed to be able to learn things — such as
‘where the good hiiiting is — and to get power from spirits to help members of their group.
{In Figure 5.9 is ashaman from a Native American tribe in Alaska in the early 20th century

to cure a sick boy.

Theroles and duties of shamans - if not their supernatural powers — are similar to those
of religious authorities who conduct systematic, symbolic activities in modern religions,
evetb today.

SJ

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD REUGIONS
