
--- Page 1 ---
Hippo (now in Algeria; d.430), Western churches emphasized the “fallenness” of the human
race after Adam and Eve's disobedience — the idea that human beings are by nature prone to
serious error (are “sinful”) and cannot overcome this condition on their own. They need to
be rescued (“saved”); they have to let God do for them what they cannot do for themselves.
This rescue (or “salvation”) was accomplished by Jesus’ death on the cross. It is sacrificial
and salvifc (it saves them). As we shall see, this concern with sinfulness and guilt came to
dominate medieval European Christianity and then Protestant thinkers such as Martin
Luther and John Calvin.

Psychologists of religion often see Augustine's concern with sinfulness as linked to his
negative views about sex. Asa teenager, he was undisciplined and out of control. The woman
he lived with had a baby when he was 14. During his twenties, in an effort to get control of
himself, he began to follow the teachings of Mani (d.276),a religious figure who

the human soul is good and made of light, while the body is bad and made of dark earth.
‘Adding to Augustine's negative view of the human body was his reading of/philosophers
influenced by Plato who saw the soul as striving for good and the body pulling us toward

evil. When Augustine became a Christian and then a bishop es, he felt guilty for
his sinful early years and came to view sex itself as evil. Its sexual intercourse, he
said, that the Original Sin of Adam and Eve is passed on to Bach succeeding generation.
According to Augustine, even within marriage, sexe for pleasure is sinful; sex is

only acceptable as fulfilling the task of continuing the human race. What is more, since
women were the source of al is sexual temptations, Augustine thought of them as morally”
rege smegetcme
in marriage; even better is to liv a celibate life a8 a priest or monk.

‘Augustine's thinking influenced theology in other ways, as well. Onlaies his
rationalism, his confidence in thé)ability of the human mind to figure things but. As a
Christian, he saw the need for faith, of course, but reason can work with faithyhe said. His
‘motto was “Faith seeking understanding” Augustine's books combined feferences to the
Bible with quotations phers and his own ina way
that showed conifidence in the power of reason to clarify mat faith and to establish
truths of its own. Inthe Middle Ages Christian thinkers inherited this confidence in reason.
Christians believe that God exists, for example, but thedlogians such as Anselm of
Canterbury ( )) and Thomas Aquinas (d. 1274) worked out arguments to prove the
existence bagi eerie pig aerate
God)exists to knowing that he does. They aso thought carefully about the nature of God,

‘questions about God's knowledge, power, and goodness, and his relationship to
the human race. Starting in the 11th f the Catholic Church established universities
in Western Europe, and in them 1 study of the existence and attributes of God)
was called the “Queen of the Sciences*”

Another major developmentiin’'the Christian Middle Ages was devotion to saints —
individuals recognized for theif extraordinary goodness. In early centuries Christians
remembered those who ‘out for their piety, such as martyrs who had died for their
faith. Relics of saints, sch as their bones, were treasured, and each altar had at least one
relic built into it. Eventually, the church worked out an official list of saints and a procedure
for adding new ofieS. One requirement was that miracles be attributed to the person, such

)

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS


--- Page 2 ---
Popular Religion, Folk Religion,
Lived Religion

Popular religious practices are sometimes known as folk religion -

beliefs and practices of people that are not strictly part of their religion

but are not in conflict with it either. Often passed down through local
communities and so varying from region to region, folk beliefs and practices
generally refiect practical concerns such as health and prosperity. For example,
people may carry an image of a particular saint believed to be list in safe
travels, or recite a prayer to a personal angel to keep them safe during sleep.

Many scholars of religion view such beliefs and practices as part of lived
religion. The study of lived religion de-emphasizes organized religion in favor of
less formal expressions of people's spiritual . One of the major
proponents of the study of lived religion was Wilfred Cantwell Smith (d. 2000).
He taught that religion should not coon msi abstract set of beliefs and
practices but as the lived experience of individuals in their relationship to the
transcendent. ie)
Some scholars see the Ik religion” as derogatory, as if such

practices are somehow of a lesser order than “official” or orthodox reli
well, some see it as a reflettion of the inadequacy of the term “religion? in the
first place. They argue that “religion’ is a category based on a Christias?paradigm
that requires certain <Bmponents and excludes others ~ some, may well
be as important to ple who practice them as, for ‘sacraments are
to Christians. retum to this discussion in Chapter 10.

a ee praying to the dead person to
i with God for them. People prayed to saints for specific things, and even
visited (“made pilgrimages to”) places jatéd with their lives and therefore considered
(their “shrines”) to ask for favors. for example, had been a talented musician

ici the foster father of Jesus, was a carpenter and

‘of carpenters. Itis in this context that we see aspects

Joseph is also the patron of house hunting and selling. People
may bury a statue of Joseph in their yar. Similarly, St. Jude is
nt of “lost causes” and he requests that his favors be acknowledged.
" sections of newspapers often have notices that say, “Thanks to
received.” The calendar of the Catholic church still celebrates hundreds of

mother of Jesus, Mary, is also highly important in Christianity. The church
said that Jesus was God, and Mary was his mother, so the Council of Ephesus in

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 3 ---
451 declared her to be the Mother of God. She is a figure of enormous popular devotion,
particularly in Roman Catholicism and Orthodox Christianity.

Western Europe through the Middle Ages, the traditions now known as Orthodox developed
in Greece, the Middle East, Africa, and Russia. In Greece, the Byzantine Church flourished
from the 4th century to 1453, when the Ottoman Turks conquered Constantinople, changed
its name to Istanbul, and made it the capital of their Islamic empire. Since Islamic law
protected religious freedom, Christianity continued to thrive. In 988 the leaders of Russia
adopted a Byzantine form of Christianity.

‘Though there were tensions between these Eastern churches and the pope in Rome6ver
theological and political issues, they were all considered to be in the same tradition until

1054, when disagreements between the Patriarch of Constantinople and. issary of the
pope led them to excommunicate (declare someone to be no longer a of the
community) each other. From this Great Schism on, the churches have
considered themselves separate from the Roman Catholic ng the Crusades,
Western Catholics captured and looted Constantinople, an that has not been
forgotten by Eastern Christians.

‘Whereas the Western Christians remained unified ¢ leadership of the pope in

Rome until the Protestant Reformation, Eastern Christians did not have a central authority.
They organized regionally, resulting ina strong connection between the religious leaders >”
the national political leader, and the national gg Ton rece ne
of the churches, such as the Greek arch, the Russian Orthodox Church the
Serbian Orthodox Church, the Bulgari ‘Church, and the Romanian,
Church. There are also Oriental ‘Churches based in Egypt, Syria, Ethiopi Eritrea,
and India, Y
Besides this political differene®, Eastern Orthodox Christians differ iether ways from
more ornate. The priests wear richly ornamented vestments (garhnents), icons (painted
pictures of Jesus, Mary and the saints) are important, and ines ® burned a an offering
et ig i ger chp ens
used. On the days of the year, too, Orthodox’ Christians are required to fast
(abstain from food and drink) to some degree.)

theology, Eastern Orthodox rely heavily on the writings of early

such as Gregory of Nyssa, St. Great, and St.John Chrysostom. These
men lived long before Anselm of Canterbury (4. 1109) created the Atonement Theory of
Jesus’ crucifixion. That theory said thatijess’s death paid the debt owed by the human race
for the Original Sin of Adam. By the tine Anselm, and later Martin Luther and John Calvin,
were teaching the Atonement ‘Thedry, Greek Orthodox Christians had split away from
Western Christianity. So adopted the Atonement Theory. This makes their
explanation of what Jesus didy and what Christian life is, different from what Catholics and

In Orthodox thetipy, God created human beings in his image and wanted them to grow
in likeness to higié The central goal of life is theosis, becoming like God and unified with
~)

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS


--- Page 4 ---
FIGURE 6.11 Greek Orthodox priests)Palm Sunday
procession. © Hanan acharSupecStoek

God. Jesus became the God-man, in-brder to bring humanity and divinity together. As
St. Athanasius of Alexandria saidy/Jesus “was made man that we might be made God.”
‘Therefore, in the Orthodox perspective, Jesus saved the human race not by paying a debt for
sin, but by allowing peopl to join more fully with the life of God.

The Protestant Reformation

At the end ofthe Middle Ages there was another major split among Christians, the
Protestafit Reformation, when the German monk Martin Luther (d. 1546) challenged
Roman Catholic authorities over what he considered corrupt practices and false doctrines.
In 1517 he wrote a list of Ninety-Five Theses and circulated them among friends and

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 5 ---
bishops he thought would be sympathetic to reforming the church. According to legend, he
also nailed his document to the door of the church in Wittenberg.

A major complaint of Luther’s was about the church's selling indulgences, which are
reductions in the time a dead person would have to suffer in Purgatory before entering
heaven. According to a Christian teaching articulated at the First Council of Lyon in the
13th century, Purgatory is a state of suffering endured by the dead whose sins keep them
from being fully reconciled with God. The effects of their sins are “purged” by a fire like that
of hell. When people received an indulgence from the church, this would shorten their time
in Purgatory after they died; a plenary (full) indulgence would eliminate their time in
Purgatory altogether. The church taught that indulgences could be earned by sayinig certai
prayers, by doing good works, and by contributing money to the support of good
Luther's day, abuses of the sale of indulgences had become widespread. Indulgence
traveled the countryside, with little accountability for the funds they

Luther also objected to several of the church's teachings. One wai faith and
‘good works are necessary for salvation. Luther taught that faith in Jesus’ redemptive death
alone (sola fides) is necessary for salvation. Following Augustinejhe said that because people
inherit the effects of Original Sin from Adam and Eve, to choose good
actions without God’s favor or “grace.” And there is nothing w®'can do to earn God’s grace.
According to Luther, people do not even have free someone does something
.g00d, this isa result of God's grace, not of the person's choice. There is nothing people can
do to carn salvation; itis totally a gift of God All that is necessary for salvation isto have” °

(d. 1564), a French lawyer,
fin Kates, en emgage devesiatingoSics of Ccgonl

Good men, and all others Augustine, have labored that we
derive aminnate ity from our very birth.... Even before we behold the light of
life, we. sight of God defiled and polluted, 1964, book II, i, 6-7)

For every newborn baby deserves u punishment in hell for its depravity.
Not onlfis there no free will and therefore people can do to help themselves, but
from all eternity God knew whom he would choose to save and who would be damned.
This teaching is called predestinat ent groups influenced by Calvin came to be
In England, too, there were fiajot disagreements with the Roman Catholic Church, but
they centered around church ty rather than doctrine. So through the Reformation

period, the Church of remained “catholic,” and is still known as the Anglican
Catholic Church (or A.@, for short).
In the 17th 19th centuries, hundreds more Protestant groups arose — Baptists,

Methodists, Quakers, Mennonites, Seventh-Day Adventists, etc. Each had its own pattern of
~)

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS


--- Page 6 ---
beliefs and practices, but all had some disagreements with the Catholic Church. The major
things challenged by the reformers were teachings about Purgatory, the authority of the
pope, devotion to the saints, mandatory celibacy for priests, monasticism (the renunciation
of worldly life and withdrawal to a “monastery” to live a life devoted to spiritual
development), most of the sacraments (see below), and infant baptism.

Christian Rituals

Among the 34,000 sects of Christians, there is a wide variety of rita assemble in
a simple room and sit quietly waiting for divine inspiration before thy speak. Russian
Orthodox liturgies involve elaborate vestments, icons, and incense, and they can last hours.

understanding of sacraments is that they are rituals establi Jesus that have spiritual wl
effects on participants. The seven are Baptism (which is Believed to neutralize some of the ”
negative effects of Original Sin), Holy ist ~ re-enacting Jesus’ last)

meal and his sacrificial and salviic death), Penance (or Confession or Reconciliation =)

telling a priest one’s misdeeds and receiving ), Confirmation (marking

passage to adult moral responsibili j Holy Orders (ordination i

priesthood), and Anointing of the Sick (or Extreme Unction, which includes of
sins). Most Protestant denominations have only two sacraments: Baptism and Holy

Communion, also called the Lord Supper or the Eucharist.
~~
~ Jehristianity Today.\Y
2
‘As we saw in Chapter 1, there are now 9,000 denominati t call themselves Christian,
and they ivided into 34,000 sects. Some of | trace their lineage to Jesus

services together. Some ‘even fused. The best known ecumenical group is the World
Council of Ch has members from 349 Christian groups in 120 countries. In
1999, the rid Federation Council and the Roman Catholic Church put to rest
one of the biggest disagreements between Protestants and Catholics over the last five
centuries =the fature of justification (the process of God's making people righteous before
him), up discussions between Lutherans and Roman Catholics that started in the
early the two groups signed a joint declaration on the nature of justification. The
Methddist Church added its signature to this declaration in 2006.

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 7 ---
‘The number of Christians worldwide is about 2.1 billion, making Christianity the largest
religion. In different parts of the world, the power and influence of Christian churches
varies considerably. In Britain and Western Europe, people's identification with churches
and attendance at rituals have dropped considerably in the last century. In the U.S.,
evangelical Protestant churches have grown in numbers and strength each year, as traditional
Protestant churches such as the Lutherans and Methodists have lost members. The largest
increase in church membership is taking place in the developing world - especially in
Africa - where 23,000 people a day join a Christian church.

‘The largest Christian denomination is Catholicism, with 1.1 billion members half of
all Christians and one-sixth of the world’s population. Although usually id

the “Latin Rite” ~ the rituals familiar to European and American Catholics-~ the ic
Church includes 22 Eastern rites too, such as the Coptic Catholic rite that originated
in Egypt.

The History and Teach of Islam

Core Teachings

The history of Islam is, in the Islamic: , the history of monotheism.
core assumption in Islamic scripture) the Qur'an (“Koran” in archaic
‘The Qur'an refers to the stories ofAdamt and Eve, Noah and the flood, Abrahiari and the
covenant, Moses and the Tofah, Jesus and the Gospels, and many othefpfophets and
figures from the Hebrew Bible atd the Christian New Testament, butiif does not tell the
stories in detail or in chronological order. Instead, the says that it is
teat lng plipgl ees Wri Choe es cance tothe messages
conveyed in the Qur’an. They are part of the history of munity of those who
believe in the one ghd only God. The term for “god” in \Afabic, which is the language
of the ‘The Quran refers to God t440¥ god” allah or Allah, tying
repeat “there is no god but God.” God human beings and immediately

copmunicating with them about how to live successfully and fulfill the purpose
for whith they were created. All human being are called upon to submit to the will of
God by establishing justice. In doing so, they will be following the din, the term used by
the Qur'an to summarize the core of the monotheistic tradition.

We have seen that the Hebrew BiBl€ uses the same term. This is not surprising, since
Hebrew and Arabic are closely'gelated Semitic languages. What is perhaps surprising,
though, is that neither the Bible nor the Qur'an uses a term that translates easily
into the English term, ” As we saw in Chapter 1, din in both Hebrew and Arabic
‘means “judgment” — in particular, divine judgment.

Human beings will ll be judged on the Last Day, the yom al-din, “the day of judgment.”
‘And all people azticilled upon to make their own decisions in light of that reality. So din is

=)

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS


--- Page 8 ---
FIGURE 6.12 Indian Muslims praying. Fredric RenandedAlamy

like justice; itis both the goal or purpose of human existence, and thé means of achieving
it. People are called upon 16 live in accordance with the “true din,” the din of Abraham and
of all prophets. They all lived their lives and made their decisions based upon - in Islamic
terminology, “in submission to” — the will of God. The terg?for “submission (to the will of
God)” in Arabic is islam. Therefore, the Qur’an sas that islam is the true din. When
translated int6 English, this becomes “Islam is the tru¢ religion.” (Qur'an 3:19) However, it
is important to understand that, from the perspécti¥e of the Qur'an, this does not mean
that other religions are false. Rather, it conveys the idea that Islam is the culmination of the

istic (or Abrahamic) tradition, ‘Th€ message brought in the 7th century ce by
Muhammad, the prophet of Islam, confirmed the messages of earlier messengers, corrected
some misinterpretations of thosevearlier messages, and completed or finalized the
transmission of messages from God to humanity.

Muslims refer to their ptophet as Prophet Muhammad and, in order to show respect,
add the blessing “Peace be upon him” (PBUH or, more correctly, “The peace and blessings
of God be upon him,” iit Arabic abbreviated as SAW). However, Muhammad is actually
considered the lastof the prophets of Islam, not the first. Muslims consider Adam to be the
first prophet of trie Din. The Qur’an mentions Adam 25 times, referring to human beings
as the “children Of Adam.” Adam is considered a prophet because through him God delivered
a messageé'jo humanity. Human beings are the creatures of God, created to be stewards, his
delegates'on the earth. The term used for steward is khalifah. (In English this becomes
“caliph” This term is later politicized, as imperial rulers take upon themselves the

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS
