
--- Page 1 ---
they are flexible in their interpretations of these words. Reconstructionist Jews do not
believe in a personal God, for example, and neither do some Reform Jews, including rabbis.
Conservative Judaism requires belief in God, but leaves the description of “God” quite
open. Similarly, the Messiah is understood by many Jews to be a better time in the future,
rather than a liberating king. And many do not believe literally in an apocalyptic World to
Come, or even in a personal life after death.

Yet the core teaching of Judaism from ancient times to the present remains that the
people of Israel were chosen by God to be “a kingdom of priests and a holy nation.” God
established a covenant with Abraham and renewed it with Moses at Sinai, and the "people
of Israel” - Jews — are bound by it today. As God’s People, they have a special ili
and by carrying out this responsibility they make their lives holy and set an example f0¥ the
rest of the world to follow.

unit it christianity |

The History and Teac! ngs ofChristianity
Origins

‘What we now call Christianity was started of Nazareth in the first century.

birth to death, he was a Jew and preserited himself as a Jewish reformer. He did

himself “Christ” - this isa title used his followers. “Christ” is the Englishifdrm of

Christos, the Greek translation: meaning “one who is anointed (as king).” As we

sav, the idea that a messiah would come to liberate Jews from foreign oppfestors became

important in the centuries before Jesus birth. The Messiah, it was said ld be a Jewish
Y

king descended from i
‘vet phone eoeBl come ones wt

after his death, in from the Old English word for
(see Chapter 3) about the exact dating of the
were written atleast forty years after the events they
agree of the Gospels was written by
‘of the four gospels are attributed to the friends of Jesus whose names they bear:
and John. Still, working with scriptufe and other historical documents, scholars
believe they can discern some facts about Jesus life and teachings.
Jesus grew up in the lower class in a town in Galilee in the northern part of
Palestine (the name the Romans had given to the parts of the land of Canaan between the
Jordan River and the Medit ‘now known asthe state of Israel and the Palestinian
territories of the West Bank and’ Gaza). When he was about thirty, Jesus began preaching
about “the kingdom of Goi” “kingdom” here being a translation of the Greek word for
“reign” or “rule” ( Palestine was ruled by Rome at the time, the language of
learning was still ‘The gospels were therefore written in Greek.) The Kingdom or
Reign of God wolild be a world in which people lived the way God has told them to live.
~)

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS


--- Page 2 ---
FIGURE 6.8 Statue of Jesus Christ the Redeemer abdye Rio de Janiero, Brazil, Mark
SchwettmanShutterstock Images

Like many preachers at the time, Jesus spoke of an “apocalypse,” a catastrophic ending to
the world as we know it. He said thatwhen this happens, God will judge everyone and then
reward those who have followed this will, and punish those who have not. Many of Jesus’
followers thought that he wais tite Messiah, but he did not appear to be a kingly figure, much
less a political liberator, as most people expected the Messiah to be. Jesus did not tell his
followers to overthrow Roman rule, and even told them to pay their taxes to the Romans.
His preaching was'uot about politics, but about morality. Nor did he speak as a theologian
discussing doctrine or as a rabbi discussing details of the law. He preached in simple
stories ~ calléd parables - about how people should live. When he said that people should
love their neighbors, for example, and someone asked, “Who is my neighbor?” Jesus did not
defineneighbor,” but showed what he meant by telling the parable of the Good Samaritan
(Luike'10:25-37).

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 3 ---
Samaritans Today
‘There are still Samaritans today. Many live near Mount Gerizim ~ known

as Jabal Tur, in Arabic, located in the West Bank city of Nablus - which
is biblical Shechem. Samaritans believe Mount Gerizim is where Abraham
almost sacrificed his son. They therefore hold it sacred.

In that story a Jewish traveler is beaten by bandits and left for dead at the
‘Two religious authorities pass by, one after the other, but neither stops to help the victim.
‘Then a Samaritan comes by, nurses the man's wounds, takes him to an fin and instructs
the innkeeper to take care of the man until he is well, and pays the

‘The Samaritans — “people of Samaria’- claimed that they were from the
tribes of Israel (see above). However, this claim was rejected who returned to
Jerusalem from Babylonian and the two been bitter enemies
ever since, So Jesus’ using a Samaritan as an example of behavior would have y

seemed strange to his Jewish audiences, who were with morality exclusively S
within their own community. There have been numerous religious interpretations of the
pblove ihe centres but hla sev inisemphassonan ice mor community”
a i a la &

the two traditions can be sen in the §faon on
to be a summary of major theme in Jesus’

it .” statements about how peopleare “blessed”
hese for Hepes thn fare gentle, who

when they do God's will ever
forgive others, and who to be persecuted for the sake of justice. By following the
will of God they embody thé Kingdom of God.

While for at the time, being a good Jew wa8icarefully following the 613

mitzvot, Jesus emphasizes what is called the “Great iment” from Leviticus
19:18: "You jot take vengeance or bear a gru
neighbor as yourself.” He skips hundreds of mi
and the Sabbath, Rejecting the bil
and 4 f6oth for a tooth” - Exodus 21: iticus 24:19-21), Jesus says, “Do not
resist an evildoer.” While the Hebrew Bible sanctioned retaliation (or vengeance),
Jesus stresses love, He says, “You it said, ‘Love your neighbor and hate your
enemy? Lees gh eptetaa i apetie gerstrers Loe
(Matthew 5:43-44) This emphasis Will comprise another distinction between the Judaic
and Christian traditions.

‘As we shall see, some aspects of these teachings will be reinterpreted by later Christians
as circumstances change, but certain aspects of Jesus’ teaching remain central to the
Christian tradition history, including his focus on love, as well as doing the will
i a fan rae emma

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS 8

--- Page 4 ---
The Beatitudes, from the Sermon
on the Mount

Blessed are the poor in spirit, for thei is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted.

Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth.

Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be filled.

Blessed are the merciful, for they will receive mercy.

Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God.

Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called childten of God.

Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness! sake, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven.

‘Our Father in heaven, hallowed (hol, be your name. Your kingdom come, ‘)
your will be done, on earth asit is in Give us this day our daily bread, and)
forgive us our offenses, as we also have forgiven those who offend us. And do niet lead

pete <en, -Aubmannaleialery «4

‘The important things in’ inues, are not material can wear out
or be lost. What is imy striving to carry out God’s will. Like, father, God knows
that you need such ‘and clothing, and he will if you do his will.
‘The Gospels than just what Jesus taught. describe what he did,
such as healing blind and paralyzed peopleyand-bringing dead people back to
life. The writers of the Gospels said that they were these miracles to show that
Jesus spoke aiid acted with authority from God, people were attracted to his

asa result. )

‘As Jesus attracted more and more followers; sorhe of whom called him the Messiah and
ing/of the Jews, the Roman rulers of Paleitine became suspicious. They feared that he
would lead a revolution. So Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor of Judea (the province
where Jesus lived), tried Jesus and sentenced him to death by crucifixion. The Gospels say
that three days after Jesus died he éafne back to life (was “resurrected”), spent 40 days among
his followers, and then (went up”) into heaven. His followers expected him to
return soon ~ as , when this did not happen, different understandings of
who Jesus was evolved nd an entire movement developed around his teachings

The Development of Christian Doctrine

‘The most influential person after Jesus in the new movement was Paul of Tarsus (“last
Aarne stasis spain itis ie Gre eos ros se lec
Dye hyve ~ such a ain what now Tsk who ved om abot 3.

o

2) PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 5 ---
about 66 cx. He was a Pharisee who had adapted to the Greco-Roman world, Paul was the
first to write anything that is now in the New Testament — his Letters or Epistles, which he
used to spread the new movement beyond Palestine to Greece and Rome. The first Christians
thought of themselves as Jews, and so required that non-Jewish men joining their group be
circumcised. However, Paul says that this is a new movement and should include not only
Jews but anyone else who is willing to follow Jesus’ teachings. As more and more non-Jews
joined, eventually Christians came to think of themselves as a separate tradition.

Paul never met Jesus and says very little about the details of Jesus’ life. His epistles
mention some aspects of Jesus’ moral teaching. In his frst letter to his followers in Corinth,
nina” Yen, a

If I speak in tongues of men and angels, but have not love, | am only
‘gong or a clanging cymbal. IfI have the gift of prophecy and can all mysteries
and all knowledge, and if I have a faith that can move mountains, but hay€ not love,
1am nothing. If give all I possess to the poor and surrender my body to the flames,
but have not love, I gain nothing.

Love is patient, love is kind. It does not envy, it does not boast, itis not proud. It is not

rude, it is not self-seeking, itis not easily angered, it record of wrongs. Love
does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth. protects, always trusts,
always hopes, always preserves.

eetrtamabpchamral Cyne che lgrbor tered tle
tongues, they will be stilled; where there is it will pass away. For we

in part and we prophesy in part, but perfection comes, the imperfect disappears.
‘When I was a child, I talked I thought like a child, I reasoned like,gchild.
When I became a man, pit ways behind me. Now we see but
reflection as in a mirror; then We shall see face to face. Now I know
know fully, even as I known.

y

‘And now thedRhyee retain: Faith, hope and love. But the grep ofthese is love,
¥,

V

~w

Nini in his inaugural speech.

ificance of Jesus’ life and death. He
is, saving them ~ from their natural
i especially through his death and resurrection.

(Over the first three centuries of the éorimon era, as Christianity spread through much
of the Middle East, Northeast Africa, andsouthern Europe, a number of opinions developed
about the identity of Jesus and the meaning of his mission. It was common to refer to Jesus
as “Son of God” “Son of God” ig Standard phrase in the Hebrew Bible, meaning someone
who follows God's will, a8 wheli Jesus tells his followers to “love your enemies and pray for
those who persecute Youpso that you may be sons of your father in heaven.” (Matthew

then I shall

5:44-45) Some groups believed that Jesus was literally the “Son of God,” and
that he had no in time as normal sons have. He was the Eternal Son of God.
=)

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS 8

--- Page 6 ---
Baptism

The Gospels of Matthew and Mark say that, at the beginning of his public
life, Jesus was baptized by his cousin John in the River Jordan. As in many
traditions, in Judaism the ritual of being immersed in water ~ mikvah —is
a symbol of purification. It is required after coming into contact with

substances that are considered impure. As we saw in Chapter 4, these typically

include blood and other bodily fluids, as well as corpses. When @ non-Jew wants
to become a Jew, s/he must undergo this symbolic purification after living a life

not protected from impurity by the following of Judaic law. It thys’symbolizes a

monumental change in status — for the better. Jesus baptism became a symbol of

2 similar change in status; baptism indicates acceptance of Jesus’ teachings. in

Matthew 28:19, he commissioned his apostles to!"make’disciples of all nations,

baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the)Son, and of the Holy Spirit.”

FIGURE 6.9 Woman baptized JK the Jordan River. Eddie Gerald/Alamy.

This teaching wadbated on the Gospel of John, which starts: “In the beginning was the
Word, and the Woid was with God, and the Word was God.”

There were Other ideas about Jesus, as well. Some early Christian groups believed that
Jesus was divine, but that he was not eternal because he had been created. Some said that he
was th adopted son of God — created as a man but then made divine by God. These and
matiy other ideas about Jesus circulated among early Christians in over fifty documents.

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 7 ---
FIGURE 6.10 In hoc signo vinces.

‘They included the four gospels most Christians are familiar with (Matthew,
and John), as well as the Gospel of Thomas, the Gospel of Peter, the Gospelof the
the Gospel of the Nazareans, and the Gospel According to the Hebrews. Early Christians

also had the letters of Paul and James (another of Jesus’ followers), now in the
canonical (official) Bible. However, there were letters of other early Christiai preachers, as
well, such as Clement, Ignatius, Barnabas, and Polycarp. Known as the Apostolic Fathers,
they did not know Jesus but they did know the original = Jesus’ closest

students and messengers - and so their Ist- and 2nd- are considered
authoritative. As well, besides the now canonical Apocalypse gf John, early Christians had
the Apocalypse of Jesus’ great friend Peter. With inj ‘so many diverse sources, it is
not surprising that early Christian thought reflected multiple viewpoints. There was, in
these early centuries, no orthodoxy in Christian thought.

The Institutionalization and » Ae 4
‘This lack of orthodoxy would change with the development of Christianity as.a°pdlitical
force. During the first three centuri istianity, several Roman rulers had stlered the
persecution of Christians. In 64 the emperor Nero blamed the Christians for'the fire that
burned much of Rome, and he titted killing Christians in the Roman in horrible
ways for public entertai He even devised a tunic i ‘with a flammable
Tigt ott hig crise erty (itera a ‘witness” but ‘someone who
maintains commitment to a cause even in the face of death) burn to death to
the delight of the a
thousands ians killed.
in 312, the Emperor Constantine, mother was Christian, became
in the movement. Constantine led of warfare, He fought with other
\r leadership of the Roman Empire, anid led battles against European tribes that
did not want to be part of that empire. Aceording to one story, before a major battle he had
a vision of the Greek letters chi and first two letters of the Greek word for “Christ;”
superimposed on one another. Under this were the words In hoe signo vinces—“in this sign
you will conquer.”
Taking this vision a dvi ese, Constantine had his troops pin these symbols on
their shields, and they won ‘the battle, After this he signed an edict that allowed Christians to
; instead of in hiding as they had done during the persecutions.

Constantine. Anéb their allegiance to Constantine no doubt strengthened his political
~)

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS


--- Page 8 ---
The Expanded Nicene Creed

We believe (| believe) in one God, the Father Almighty, maker of heaven
and earth, and of all things visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus
Christ, the only begotten Son of God, and born of the Father before all
ages. (God of God) light of light, true God of true God. Begotten not
made, consubstantial to the Father, by whom all things were made. Who for us
men and for our salvation came down from heaven. And was incarnate of the
Holy Spirit and of the Virgin Mary and was made man; was efikified also for us
under Pontius Pilate, suffered and was buried; and the third gay rose again
according to the Scriptures. And ascended into heaven, sits at the right hand of
the Father, and shall come again with glory to judge the living and the dead, of
whose Kingdom there shall be no end. And (| ae ey st te Lod
and Giver of life, who proceeds from the Father (andthe Son), who together with
the Father and the Son is to be adored and. who spoke by the Prophets.
‘And one holy, catholic, and apostolic Church. We confess (| confess) one baptism
fein ar Adelie ono er
and the life of the world to come. S)

authorities.

At the time, various Christian communities i siti pes
ee translated as “bishop.” One of
oe Aancie ered SEY been created by God. However, at

the il of Nicea, that idea was in favor of the view that Jesus, like
the Father, was uncreated. By the) the conference, a majority of bishops had
ng that Jesus was uncreated and was the same

known as the Nicene Creed. At a later council in
Constantinople in 381, it,as expanded into the familiar creed that is now accepted by

official, Arius and his followers were branded heretics. “Arian”
forms of Christianity continued, mainly in the Middle East, as
the official control of Rome.
At the same time, Christian leaders rejected more than half of the gospels and
is by the various Christian communities. By the mid-300s they had determined
Sai on tw roe

8 PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 9 ---
Christianity and Faith

Being 2 Jew means living in accordance with the laws of God. One
becomes a bar or bat mitzvah ("son” or “daughter” of the law or
“commandments"). Similarly, being a Muslim means living in accordance
with Islamic law. In the case of Christianity, the identifying factor is

having correct beliefs. This is, in fact, the core meaning of “orthodony,” from the

Greek words for “straight” and “teaching.” The rite of passage into adulthood in
Christianity is Confirmation — a ceremony in which one affirms one’s “faith
“belief in” the teachings of the Church. This is why Christianity is often cal
“faith.” While specific beliefs are central to both Jewish and Muslim identity itis
less common to refer to either Judaism or Islam as faiths.

Christianity, its basic literature and doctrines newly established, bes
df the Risen empireia'500. Thet meant that wallptral i he government's legitimacy;

its leaders approved of the government and acce ‘official teachings became the )
measure of full membership in the Roman state. Those who did not accept official Christian
teaching wee not only excluded fom the rights of cienship; because they did not accept

politicization of Christianity marked the]
‘Two more councils of the Chi
understandings of Christian,
and fully human, one person Wit
was and always will be God.
the Son. The Father, the
bndevee! com, tr
von ie unis to ty he be eo Tass sari Gas
jan groups. When members ‘a group had major differences
they usually split into different churches. This splitting has led to
| Christian sects.
&
Eastern and Western Christians »
Once Christianity was the state relig 6 a, a
government and its leaders had political influence. In the 3rd century, the
bishops of Jerusalem, ‘Syria, Alexandria in Egypt, and Rome were called
patriarchs, In the 4th cent Constantine moved the imperial capital to Byzantium,
in today’s Turkey, its the fifth patriarch. Starting in the 3rd century, the
spe me pdt ey thn ac ster hae
their authority from)! ''s first bishop, Peter, and Jesus had chosen Peter to lead his

new church. So,'they

|, the Bishop of Rome was a super-bishop, the leader of all

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS 8

--- Page 10 ---
a

Catholic
or Latin’ with its headquarters in Rome. The!
be the patriarch of the Byzantine

es Rekeat Fie ey center of the Roman Empire gave the Bishop of,

400s the Roman Empire in Europe was disintegrating

by Germanic tribes. As a result, the bishop of Rome became

assumed some of the roles that kings and princes had had in the

Empire. Through ‘Ages, the Roman Catholic Church was a central institution in

Europe, and church law, developed from Roman Law, provided social stability. The officials

of the as local clerks of the empire. In fact, the term “clerk” comes from the
same root'as “clergy” the religious hierarchy.

of doctrine, the western Roman churches and the eastern Byzantine churches

Sitecsteaeticie evtanel wiser tiglaai ok sosaies at

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS
