
--- Page 1 ---
The last set of four in the Laws of Manu is the Four Stages of Life. These are presented
not only from a male perspective, but from an upper-class male perspective. The first stage
is that of Student, a time when young men are expected to pursue their studies full-time
and not work. They are also expected to be celibate. The second stage is the Householder.
Here the man marries and raises a family. Most people in traditional Indian culture have
not gone beyond these two stages.

The third stage of life, that of the Forest Dweller, occurs at about the age when people
retire today. Here the man turns over most of the duties of running the household to
someone younger and spends more time in contemplative activities. The fourth stage
involves a complete break with what has gone before. It is that of the sannyasi, or
Renunciant. The man stops all work, gives away his possessions, apf holds a funeral
for the man he was. He moves to a retreat to pursue meditation ‘and enlightenment

Hinduism Today

In describing classical Hinduism, we have swit ‘the past tense and the pr
tense, mentioning events from two thousand yeaf’ ago and then commenting on the

and practices of Hindus today. That is ‘of the basic ideas and id
in the 7th century have continued to be represented in Hinduism in the present,'in one
pretekorient jo, ae. Aborretrenmmertapy, <a emn

reformers changed some: most of the ideas and practices of Hinduism
are alive and well ia today. Sy

Rituals ”

a
‘A good way to get’ feel for contemporary Hinduism is at its rituals. The general
term for a Hingu ritual is puja, the act of showing to a deity through prayers,
and offérings. Pujas are conducted both in the home and at temples.
homes have a room or part of a roon) set aside for worship, with pictures or
‘ofthe family’s special deity or deities, Worshippers welcome the deity as an honored
fand offer him or her flowers and food. They

. An ideal temple is located near a body of water. At
where the god or goddess is enshrined. There are
‘not as many organized group prayers in a Hindu temple as in a synagogue, a mosque, or a
church. Instead most ‘come to the temple to see the god or goddess, and to be seen

When a B: ig ak ds ics al iad a So is
some back to the people asa gift from the deity. Worshippers may even

grace. This consecrated food is called prasada.

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS.

--- Page 2 ---
FIGURE 7.11 Students celebrating Holi. © Jayanta ShawRelieycotbis

Besides rituals in the home and in temples, Hinduism has many seasonal festivals, Holly
for example, is a spring festival celebrated with Borifires and with people splashing colored
powder and water on each other.

‘The birthdays of Krishna, Rama, and Ganesha are also celebrated.

As in other religions, too, there are ritdals to mark important events in individtals lives.
After a child is born, there isa ceremony in which the father prays for the health and
happiness of the child. There arelalso rituals for naming the child, for feeéting the child its
first solid food, and for the first cutting of its hair. Among the most ighportant is a “rite of
passage.” At abouitage eight, a young brahmin boy is initiated into the study of the Vedas.
The ceremony involves the chanting of a short mantra (soud)or Word or words that are
considered effectivejin transforming reality, like a prayer in thé monotheisms) and a day of
begging, Thenlhie'ts given a sacred thread to wear over his left shoulder, marking him as a
brahmin.

Some groups have ceremonies to mark a girl’*Beginning of menstruation. She wears
new clothing with flowers in her hair and is given special foods.

Weddings are major community events, There are many variations in the ceremonies,
which can last from half an hour to fiye days. Traditionally, marriages are arranged by
Hindu families. Parents try to match their offspring’s mates in social class, age, and looks.
When suitable possibilities are found, parents compare their horoscopes, to get compatible
personality types and also to'seé that their horoscopes do not predict that they will have
hardships at the same timé)jin life. Today it is common for families to advertise their sons
and daughters as eligible in newspapers and online. (To see what the process looks like,
try http?//www.bharatmatrimony.com.) All these rituals and precautions are good examples
of how people’s/traditions provide rites of passage to mark the milestones in life, as

330 MILLION GODS ~ OR NONE: TWO TRADITIONS FROM INDIA

--- Page 3 ---
Mohandas Gandhi (d. 1948) on God,
Truth, and Politics

wy |

Mohandas (Mahatma)\Gandhi was the spiritual and political lead India in
its drive for political independence from Britain in the first half'ofthe 20th
century. The jally calls him Father of the Nation)ahd he is also
known simply as Bapu, Father. Gandhi's birthday, October, is a national
holiday in India. He advocated non-violent civil disobedience to liberate india, an
sppront at inspired many other leaders, such as Martin Luther King Jr. in the
U. fed as a lawyer, Gandhi left many merprable writings and speeches.

FIGURE 7.12 Mohandas Gandhi.
Dinodia ProtoGety images.

y,
‘What | want to achieve, - what | striving and pining to achieve
these thirty years, ~ is self-realization, to see God face to face, to attain
‘Moksha [freedom from birth and death]... All that | do by way of speaking
and writing, and all my. in the political field, are directed to this
same end.... The experiments | am about to relate are... spiritual, or rather
moral; for the essenee 6f religion is morality.

-.t have given the’thapters | propose to write the title of The Story of My

Experiments with Truth. These will of course include experiments with

non-violenc®, celibacy and other principles of conduct believed to be distinct

from.tfuth. But for me, truth is the sovereign principle, which includes

met other principles. This truth is not only truthfulness in word, but
thfulness in thought also, and not only the relative truth of our

oe

--- Page 4 ---
conception, but the Absolute Truth, the Eternal Principle, that is God. There
are innumerable definitions of God, because His manifestations are
innumerable. They overwhelm me with wonder and awe and for a moment
stun me. But | worship God as Truth only. | have not yet found Him, but | am
seeking after Him.... Often in my progress | have had faint glimpses of the
Absolute Truth, God, and daily the conviction is growing upon me that He

alone is real and all else is unreal... The instruments for the quest of truth
are as simple as they are difficult... The seeker after truth should be humbier
‘than the dust. The world crushes the dust under its feet, but the seeker
‘truth should so humble himself that even the dust could crush him,

anthropologists such as Geertz have noted. They also show how'they‘make sense of life by
‘giving people ways to make their future more predictable and go controllable.

Funerals are, of course, the final rite of passage. th ofa family member, the
relatives prepare the body for cremation with ritual cleafising and dressing. Burning the

corpse is seen as the ideal way to release the Soul (sometimes called the “astral body”). Many."\, ®
believe that the soul will linger as long asthe visible, so quick cremation is best. The-/
is carrie chanted to Yama, the god of

sit i son, takes twigs of holy kusha grass fipfi an
f funeral pyre, of wood on which the corpse walks
around the pyre cot use everything is backwards at the time of death —

and then lights the fire, The deadhperson is now an offering to Agni, the fire-As in the most.
ancient Vedic times, the fire is seen as an offering to heaven. &
When the corpse is alm@st completely burned, the chief, the “rite of
stick to crack the skull, thus the soul. After the
fare thrown into a river, ideally the and the mourners walk
back. Because corpses are im takes a purifying bath
‘The immediate family remains in a sige of pollution for a set number of
days (10, If, or 13 in most places) after which gather for a ceremonial meal.
services, pindas (rice balls) arBoffered to the spirit of the dead person.

Some Say that the pindas provide the dead with a symbolic transitional body.

2)
Buddhism

In much the same way that ih began a a reform movement within the monotheistic
tradition, and Protestantisip was a movement to reform Roman Catholicism, Buddhism
grew out of Hinduigm)as a movement that rejected certain features of Vedic religion.
Buddhism accepted)three important Hindu beliefs: karma, the natural justice of the
universe; * cycle of rebirth; and the goal of moksha, to escape from this cycle.

330 MILLION GODS ~ OR NONE: TWO TRADITIONS FROM INDIA

