
--- Page 1 ---
which there is evil is illusory. To the person who sees the world correctly, there is no evil or
suffering. So the answer to the question of suffering and apparent evil is to adopt a higher,
truer perspective.

Explaining Death

Of all the problematic aspects of life, the most challenging is that it comes to an end. The
desire to understand its meaning is perhaps most acute when babies or mothers die in
childbirth, or when the lives of children and other innocents become “collateral damage” in
war, or are taken in natural disasters. Sometimes people die slowly “naturally,” as
when an elderly person dies in her sleep. But even then death raises profound questions.
When the people who are close to us die, can they be goine completely and forever? The

presence of deceased loved ones often seems so real it seems impossible that
they no longer exist. And the inevitability of our own deatlisis~ at the very least disturbing.
How can it be that, after all the struggles of lift ju After all the efforts to face
the challenges of life, to overcome adversity, to maKé the hard choices and do the right
thing, can my life just be over? Can one even)imagine the end of one’s own exis
As 17th-century French pundit Frangois wucauld said, “Death and the

not to be looked at steadily.” As Star Trek's Mr. Spock would say, “It does not compute.”
‘One of the strongest statements about the enigma of death is found in the biblical
Book of Ecclesiastes. The ani author of this book is “a king in jem” (some
commentators say it wasSolomon) who had everything he desired Job, he was
not afflicted with loss of family, illness, and pain. But still he complains that there is no
ip es ois ie to anyone else's, and that it all ends im a few decades. “Man
isa creature of the beasts are creatures of chanée, and one mischance awaits
them all: deathiledmes to both alike.” (3:19) To die is to be/destroyed. “The dead know
nothing; they have no more reward, and even the ‘of them is lost. Their love and
their hate ir envy have already perished; never again will they have any share in
all that happens under the sun.” (9:5~6) Andiwhelt people die, he continues, someone
else inherits all their hard-earned Si ‘one’s efforts have come to nothing. So
futile and meaningless. “God has\s@ordered it that man should not be able to
discover what is happening here under the sun. However hard a man may try, he will not
find out.” (8:17)
If we are going to make sense‘of life, we must refute the idea in Ecclesiastes that death
ihn nn aire ne pn

that death is not the end»Many teach that death is not the permanent end of a person, and
that i death that makes life worthwhile.

something]
‘We can identify four basic explanations of how people might live after they de:
© asghosts, >”

oa at the end of the world,

© asnoli-physical souls, and

0,88 persons reincarnated in new bodies.

PART | THE TOOLS

--- Page 2 ---
Ghosts

As we shall see in Chapter 5, the idea of ghosts is probably the oldest idea about life after
death, and the most widespread. A ghost looks like the person who died and may talk like
‘them, too. But ghosts are not solid like living persons, and are not subject to the laws of
physics. They may pass through doors and walls, for example, and may travel thousands of
miles effortlessly in seconds. Belief in ghosts is popular around the world, even among
people whose religions rule out such belief, such as Christians and Jews. According to a
recent poll, 34% of Americans believe in ghosts, with 23% saying that they have seen ghost.
or felt its presence; 58% of Britons believe in ghosts - 4% more than believe itn,
‘Unlike the other three concepts of life after death on our list, surviving death as.

is not something that people look forward to as making life worthwhile. In most cultures,
ghosts are thought of as unhappy, lonely, even angry. As a result, they trouble for
eniimaiiigieays “i id of ghosts.

Spiritualism

‘One modern religion based ghosts is Spiritualism. It got
started in Hydesvlle, New York,

to repeat the sound.-The Spirit did, she said. Kate and Margaret.
to rap out their ages, it did. In the days that followed,
attention from neighbors, and they worked out a code for:

oF No, and toisi ic

relatives. Peaking at eight
1920s. Mary Todd Lincoln,
held séances in the White House

ntact her dead sons.

In 1888, Margaret Fox epvined hp the “rappings” had started forty years
before: SY
When we went to bed at, night we used to tie an apple to a string and move
the string up and ising the apple to bump on the floor, or we would
drop the apple on’ r, making a strange noise every time it would
rebound. to this for a time. She would not understand it and
did not as being capable of a trick because we were so young.

AN OVERVIEW OF REUGION: MAKING SENSE OF UFE


--- Page 3 ---
Resurrection

‘The second idea of life after death is something that people do look forward to, particularly

in the monotheisms — Zoroastrianism, Judaism, Christianity, Islam, and Baha‘i. It is that

after they die, they will be resurrected, that is, brought back to life at the end of the world.

In Zoroastrian texts we are told that once evil is vanquished, a savior will renovate the world

to a beautiful condition and the dead will be resurrected to live without a trace of evil. In

Old Testament), and became important in the Christian New Testament and the Qur'an

(Islamic scripture), as we shall see in Chapter 6.

In most of the Hebrew Bible, there is no mention of life after death. It is ‘assumed that

at death a person becomes a corpse in she ‘ol, the hole in the ground in which a person is buried. N
‘The dead are not conscious, are not with God, and are not or punished. As the &4
Hebrew Bible puts it, they are “asleep in the dust.” The 165 asks God to spare his. *o)
life, arguing, “No one remembers you when he is dead. Who praises you from the grave?” °
‘The idea that death destroys the person early biblical texts, but then the)
writers of the books of Isaiah and Daniel had p1 visions about the end of the worl J

in which some of the dead would be Isaiah envisions a day when God

vindicate the people of Israel by’ to life while leaving their. d.

The dead do not live; shaded do not rise ~ bea you hae pune anddioed
them, and wiped out all f them...

~ 4
Your dead shal lve, theitcorpses shall ise, Awake and sin for jojty® who li inthe

dust! (Isaiah 26:14, 19) Y
The writer of Dai! is more cryptic: On

Ther oie time of anguish. Sone. <A

found written in the book. those who sleep in the dust of the
Sl eae sme ctng i ego sn rig
(Daniel 12:1-3)
oT

In more than 1,000 pages of the Bible, these late, prophetic visions are the only

passages that mention life after yme scholars think that these passages were written

at a time when the Jews were Being persecuted by Greeks, and they were being killed
precisely for staying faithful to God. This raised the question of justice. They were remaining
faithful to God because ‘that was God's demand. Should they not be rewarded for their
loyalty? If they are forever, then their fate is the same as those who disobey God.
This leaves little iftentive for obeying God. The writers of Isaiah and Daniel offer hope to
och eye rs may triumph for now, but in the future God will bring his
faithful: to life. Thus, belief in divine justice is maintained; it will simply happen
inthe not necessarily on earth. And life's suffering maintains meaning.

of the resurrection of the dead and the serving of justice in an “afterlife” came to
ap il br men cate or ei at yee

PART | THE TOOLS

--- Page 4 ---
FIGURE 2.2 Luca Signorelli (1450-1523),\The Resurrection of the Dead. © Sandro Vanrieytbros

good - will be resurrected and judged and then rewarded or punished. Thisyiew of resurrection
and final judgment is also found in some Zoroastrian texts, although with6ut the emphasis on
reuniting with a body. Moredver, it was reiterated in the Qur'an andiSaccepted by Muslims.

Souls

‘The first Christians believed that the resurrection jf the dead would happen at the end of
the World, Before the resurrection, they thought, those who have died are simply “asleep in
the dust” — dead and buried. Missing from this worldview was the later Christian idea that
people are made up of two parts — physicalarid nonphysical or spiritual. The Hebrew Bible
(Old Testament) and the Qur'an refleet.grholistic view of the human person. A person (a
“self”) is one thing. At death the physital body is destroyed and goes into the ground, but it
can be brought back to life by thessame Creator who made it in the first place.

The region in which earlyChristians and Muslims lived, however, had a number of
influences ~ primarily Gréek, Roman, and Persian. In the worldviews of those cultures,
persons are composed f an immaterial soul or spirit that was embedded in a material
body at birth. The material body perishes, but the soul — being immaterial - is not
subject to the wounds of the flesh. This dualist view of human beings was eventually

‘AN OVERVIEW OF REGION: MAKING SENSE OF LIFE

--- Page 5 ---
adopted into the perspectives of Christians and Muslims. Thus they came to think of @
person as an immortal soul living in a mortal body.

‘Adopting the dualist perspective entails an interpretation of death that is different from
that held by people who see the human being as an integrated whole. In the dualist view,
instead of the entire person dying, only the body dies. The soul, being non-physical, is unable
in the ground until the end of the world. According to others, particularly worthy souls go to
heaven while particularly guilty souls go to hell; either way, they will eventually be reunited
with their resurrected bodies. And some traditions allow for the soul to inhabit earthly regions.

‘The dualist perspective also implies a reorientation toward identity. The body
ceases to be essential to an individual's identity. It will perish, but |, bearing all the
good deeds and guilt for misdeeds, lives on.

Despite the disconnect between the idea of the restitrectigW of the person and the idea
that we survive death as immortal souls, the two beliefs serve a similar purpose. They both

make sense of death by saying that after death will be rewarded and bad people
will be punished. >?
Reincarnation ~ 3

e
‘Many religious traditions in Aftica, Asia, and Australia have taught that each of Us has been
common in ancient Greeee, ( early Christianity, there were dis of the idea.
Some scholars see the idea) of bodily resurrection as a kind of limited reincarnation.)
Clearly, belief in allows people to see the death of aéved one in a less tragic

light than if this’ person's only life. v
Toda Me icocs of tna death is reated, Wa tragic end at all. Instead, it

is a new life. In this perspective, life is part of a long learning
Page tne Sof whichis to recognize tn life is illusory at best~a punishment,
at wotst — and that people's true identities are,as Bart of a much greater non-physical
intl individuals reach this ‘are born again and again - that is, “put

‘a body again” or “reincarnated” ism, the goal is different. Instead of
recognizing one’s true identity, the epitdme of awareness is recognizing that there is no
such thing as a true individual identity. But either way, people generally must go through
‘any lifetimes before reaching this awareness and being released from the cyl of rebirths

4)
The Importance of Order
So relghon by Yoople deal with their climate concerns, such as euflering and death.
‘These are’ for obvious reasons: they cause us enormous pain and so far human

beings have found no way to avoid them. They are inevitable. As we shall see in Chapter 7,
the Buddha said that life is characterized by suffering. This is the first “Noble Truth,” and
understanding it is the first step toward dealing effectively with it. However, there is
=)

PART | THE TOOLS

a

4

Y
°

--- Page 6 ---
something else about these inevitable difficulties that causes us discomfort ~ the fact that
‘we do not know just when they are going to come. In fact, we know very little about the
future except that it will involve suffering and death at some point. (Yes, and taxes.)
‘Again we are confronted with Koestler’s theory about the role of consciousness in religion.
We are concerned about the future because we know that there have been difficult challenges
in the past and itis unlikely that they will be the only ones in our lives. Not knowing what will
happen next makes us fel vulnerable. Knowing what the future is going to bring would provide
great comfort. It would allow us to prepare for it, and give us a sense of control, a feeling that
thereis order in the world. This concern for order is clearly reflected in many religious traditions.

Order Out of Chaos Y

Many traditions explain the beginning of the world as “bringing order out of chaos.” In the
ancient Babylonian tradition of Mesopotamia (present-day Iraq), the Elish
describes the feats of the great god Marduk, who killed his, Tiamat and made
the world out of her body. Tiamat is described as the great, ; stholars see her as the
personification of primeval, terrifying chaos. So the great god. an orderly world out
of chaos. Tiamat/chaos is evil, and order is seen as a very ing.

Interestingly, the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament) uses aisimilar term for the out-of-control
raging primordial waters. At the beginning of the first book, Genesis, we are told that
“the earth was without form... and darkness was upon the face of the deep” before “the> ‘y
spirit of God moved upon the face of the God created light and
from darkness, and separated the watergiof the sky from those of the sea. He then.
the waters into one place, “let{ting) the: appear.” The Hebrew term for
abysmal waters is tehum, a of she Akkadian (the language of the Enya Elish)
tiamat. So again, God brought or of chaos, “and God saw that it was good.”

In Zoroastrian scriptures, thelAvestas, the term for what is true it and good, is
asha. As we saw, asha “order” or “proper functioning” I druj, means
“Iie"and “chaos” or “disordet” At the end of time, disorder will bgiled and lif wil return

and good order.

eciuuc clue ve sO N ND ited ase haar

‘game Sonic the Hedgehog, one of the tvil characters is called Chaos. In
‘Get Smart (and the 1960s television seri it was based on), the evil organization

that Max has to combat is called the good guys belong to the secret

i (ce agency CONTROL. The Dutch cian Danny Masseling (aka Angerfist)

titled one of his 2007 hits “Chaos and Evil!” Ani, in a slight linguistic variation, the American

group System of a Down raged against “Dis in their brilliant 2001 album Toxicity.

Order and Predictability: Eschatology,

Prophecy,

Religions address the human desire for order and predictability in life in a number of ways.

‘Some include | of the future in their formal teachings, often making them central

to the tradition’s Worldview. The Abrahamic traditions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam,
~)

‘AN OVERVIEW OF REGION: MAKING SENSE OF LIFE


--- Page 7 ---
FIGURE 2.3 Victor Vasnetsov, Four Horsemen of théiapscalypse (War, Famine, Pestilence
and Death), 1887. Museum of Religion and Atheism, St. Rersburg,Russa/The Bridgeman Art Library

for example, envision a time When God will destroy the world as we knowit}will judge
everyone, and will reward or punish’them. This time is called the eschaton, Which means
the last thing, and its defining chafacteristics are described in detail in Judaic, Christian, and
Islamic scripture.

In the Book of Daniel 6f the Hebrew Bible, for example, we are told of the coming of
four great beasts, the last one of which will be really terrible. Ithas ten horns and crushes
the entire earth and then eats it. But believers do not have to Worry; as we saw above, Daniel
tells us, “Many of those who sleep in the dust of the earth will awake, some to everlasting
life; some to shame and everlasting contempt.” (12:2)

(Christian scriptures refer to the Book of Danie] and reiterate that the “end times” will be
marked by “abomination of desolation” and tHe coming of “great tribulation such as has
Hlorticen seen since the beginning of the world.” (Mt. 24:15-22; Mark 13:14-20) The Gospel
of Luke provides more detailed indicators or “signs” so that readers will be able to prepare
themselves and (literally) head for the hills: “There shall be signs in the sun, and in the
‘moon, and in the stars; and upor! the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the sea and
the waves roaring.” (21:2-33) Evil chaos will return, but the righteous can take comfort;
they will be rescued.

The last book of the Christian Bible provides even more detailed descriptions of the “end
times.” Often called the Book of Revelation, the book was originally known as The Apocalypse
of John (“apocalypSe” means “revelation”, and asa result the dramatic events accompanying
the end the world as described in Revelation are often referred to simply as the apocalypse.
Here we ate told of the “book with seven seals.” With the opening of the first four seals, four
riders ppear, one each on a white, red, black, and “pale” horse ~ the “four horsemen of the
apdéalypse.” Opening the fifth seal reveals a vision of those who were slain for their loyalty

PART | THE TOOLS

--- Page 8 ---
Apocalyptic Visions Today

For decades the idea that God will soon end the world has been
popular among Evangelical Christians in the U.S. This can be seen in
the sales figures of over 65,000,000 for the Left Behind series of books
written by Tim LaHaye and Jerry 8. Jenkins. Seven of the sixteen books

have reached No.1 on the bestseller lists for the New York Times, USA Today,
and Publishers Weekly. In the stories about the “End Times,” the good Christians
in the “Tribulation Force” are battling the “Global Community” and its
Nicolae Carpathia, who is the Antichrist. These books have been made i
three action thriller movies and two PC games.

to the “word of God.” The sixth seal releases a great earthquakej'an
as hair sackcloth, and the whole moon became as blood, and the stars of heaven fell upon
the earth ... and the heaven was removed as a scroll rolled up, and every mountain and
island were removed out of their places.” This is as “the great day of wrath.”
(Revelation 6)

‘The Qur’an’s descriptions of the end time¥are similarly striking:

(T]he sun will be darkened, when
‘mountains will be set in motion, when the pregnant camels will be aban:

when the savage beasts are 1, when the seas boil over, when!the souls
are sorted into classes, wi girl buried alive is asked for what sini se was
killed, when the record are spread open, when the sky is away,
when Hell is made to blaze, when Paradise brought near, then eveFY soul will know
1-14)

ill be thrown down, when the

.damentalist Christians and Muslims interpret the descriptions of the end
~ Scholars, on the other hand generally see in apocalyptic literature
s of the anxieties of the times in which it was produced. Many scholars think

that the apocalyptic passages in the f Daniel and Isaiah were written while the
Jews were being persecuted by the Greeks, and that the Book of Revelation was written
after Jerusalem was attacked by the temple destroyed, and Jews evicted
(70 ca). The popularity of ic texts and their “doomsday scenarios” in our own
time suggests that, like the in the age of Daniel, we are experiencing a heightened
sense of insecurity and

However, not all religious traditions have a linear view of history, with a beginning, a
middle, and an end. The traditions of India, for example, see the world as going through
wer one Tey rth, growth, decline, and renewal, eternally. There is, therefore, litle

‘AN OVERVIEW OF REGION: MAKING SENSE OF LIFE

--- Page 9 ---
need for concern about “end times.” But these traditions still reflect people's concern for
knowing what the future holds, Astrology is a highly developed art in these traditions.

Astrology, the art of predicting events based on the positions of stars, planets, and
moons, is an integral part of most Asian traditions, in fact. Its focus is on the individual,
based on the belief that one’s destiny can be discerned by the positions of celestial orbs at
the time of one’s birth. Astrology can also be used to predict important events in a
community’ life, especialy catastrophic events such as natural disasters and wars. However,
it can also deal with more mundane things such as political and financial developments.
Thus, people consult astrologers to determine when to begin an important undertaking.
‘They want to find out when the celestial bodies will be aligned in ‘way as to indicate
success of something undertaken under their alignment.

‘The term for such a time is “auspicious.” It comes from a Latin terin meaning someone
who can determine the future based on patterns observedlin the flight of birds. This was
cone ancient approach to divination ~ the effort to readithe fifure, and it was common in

remains popular. In India today, it is still
not recognize astrology to consult an
a wedding. Ds
In the traditions of the Yoruba people of western Africa, and traditions by
Yorubas who came to the slaves, such as Santeria and tion is a
responsibility of religious authorities (generically known as priests ).Itmay
be used for solving a current problem or obtaining advice on futuréuhdertakings. Known
as Ifa, Yoruba divination js practiced only by those who have reacked the highest level of
learning and are ive” Orunmila, the god of wisdomyand knowledge or destiny.
It may be accor through a variety of instrumentsjineluding reading the patterns in
1 group of cowry shells or palm nuts or a special divi in. The petitioner (the person
‘who has ie ee a ol eatarrenecr
a sacrifice to the god whose efforts wotild be most helpful with the issue at hand,
~\
e)

‘Many religious traditions Sey pots bod of onde oe tht seme fm the fc
i Some have observed that we are reluctantly so. The
4th- to 3rd-century nce philosopher Hsun Tzu (Xun Tzu) wrote a chapter titled
“Human Dispositions. .” Init he argued that we are naturally selfish and so we
Imast be controled sO or else sink into chaos. English philosopher Thomas Hobbes
(4. 1679) agreed. in his book Leviathan that, due to inherent selfishness, human
beings would! constantly, living lives that were “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and
short,” if it Were not for the control imposed by government. Whether we are naturally
beastly azid’so must be controlled or, as Hsun Tzu’s near contemporary Mencius (Meng
naturally good but easily perverted by society, there is general agreement that

hiufian beings are social and that societies need order.

~)

PART | THE TOOLS

--- Page 10 ---
‘We need communities in order to survive, More than any other animals, human beings
must rely on others to meet their needs. We are born virtually helpless and require years of
nurturing before we can meet even our most basic needs on our own. And from our earliest
‘moments we learn to interact with and depend upon others. Ideally, we learn to cooperate.
‘The more cooperatively a social group interacts, the better are its chances of survival.
Religions play fundamental roles in fostering effective, orderly social interaction.

Group Identity
‘A major component of the social function of religions is that they provide us with an
identity. Religions help us understand who we are — as individuals and as of

communities ~ and how we must treat other members of our group in order to
our own survival and that of the community. Religions also tell us how to deal with those
who threaten the order that ensures our survival ~ and sometimes even identify
just who those “others” are.

The stories that describe who we are typically explain where we
came to exist in the first place. These stories are called “creation,
“myth” here does not mean that the stories are not true;

understand and navigate life. They both give meaning ‘order or regulate our lives.

In Western culture, the most familiar creation myths are found in Genesis, the first book
of the Hebrew Bible. “Genesis” in Greck mets “origin,” and this book explains the origin” Y
ofthe world and of human beings, Agwe sew Sify, the story begins: SS”

In the beginning when God created ‘and the earth, the earth was

void and darkness covered the deep, while a wind from God swept Bver the
face of the waters. Then God. Ge! ae
saw that the light was good atid God separated the light from the

the light Day, and the ae.
‘morning, the first day. (Genesis 1:1-5)

Over the next four ont cut oy pn eg) on and fish and birds.

And “Let the earth bring forth living ‘of every kind: cattle and creeping
things and wild animals of the earth of every kind’) And it was so. God made the wild
wl indent ere pa he pet
the ground of every kind. And God saw that it was good. Then God said, “Let us
make humankind in our image, according to our likeness; and let them have dominion
over the fish of the sea, and over thebifds of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the
wild animals of the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth.”

So God created hi his image, in the image of God he created them; male
and female he God blessed them, and God said to them, “Be fruitful
and multiply, and{fillthe earth and subdue it; and have dominion over the fish of the
sea and over the Birds of the air and over every living thing that moves upon the
earth.” (Genesis 1: 24-28)

~)

‘AN OVERVIEW OF REGION: MAKING SENSE OF LIFE

