
--- Page 1 ---
FIGURE 6.3 Yochanan Ben Zakai Synagogue in Jerusalem's Old City. AKG imagevisigintiges

rules of priestly purity. What we know about the Essenes comes mostly ftom their writings in
the Dead Sea Scroll§jdoguments found by two Palestinian shepherds in caves near the Dead
Sea in the 1940s. (Following the initial discovery, archaeologists began systematic excavation
of the area and within ten years had identified some 900,se¥olls.) The Essenes considered
themselves the true faithful children of Israel, and they hoped to reconquer the promised land
from gentiles (non-Jews) and Hellenized Jews (thoseywho had adopted Greek ways).

There were other schools of thought, as well,including those messianic Jews who believed
Jesus was the messiah. It may sound odd to cout them as Jews, but Jesus was indeed Jewish
and’thought of himself as Jewish, as did'bis disciples, as his followers (or students) are
usually called. Even today, there are messianic Jews who believe that Jesus is the messiah.
(There are perhaps 250,000 messianiJews in the United States, and some in Israel, although,
as we shall see, not all Messianic Jews believe Jesus was the messiah.) However, the fourth
group mentioned by Josephus’ was the Zealots, revolutionaries who conducted guerilla
warfare against the Romans. They launched a revolt in 66 cx, which the Romans crushed,
destroying the Second Temple in 70. A second Jewish revolt in 132-135 was also put down,
killing perhaps halfa iillion Jews and destroying almost a thousand villages. This time the
emperor rebuilt Jefusalem as a Roman colony and banned Jews from entering it.

From thefijon, the Jews were in diaspora, a Greek word that originally meant a scattering
of seeds, Bint now means the dispersing of people from their homeland. Within a century,
Jews Were settled as far west as Spain and as far east as India. By this time, the followers of
Jestis ho longer considered themselves Jews, and the Sadducees, Essenes, and Zealots had

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 2 ---
disappeared. So there was one kind of Judaism left, that of the Pharisees. Theirs was the
foundation of the Judaism led by rabbis that we still have today.
After the destruction of the Second Temple, as after the destruction of the First Temple,
worship could not be centered in a temple or in Jerusalem. And sacrificing animals was
obsolete. Jewish practices had to be portable, so that they could be conducted anywhere that,
Jews might find themselves. This portable form of Jewish practice had been developing
since the Babylonian Captivity. It consisted of following the Mosaic Law, praying, and
studying the Torah. Judaism was now carried out mostly in people's homes and in meeting
places called synagogues.
“Torah” is perhaps the most important word in Judaism. It has a range of meani the
narrowest sense, it is the first five books of the Bible, the Pentateuch. In a wider sense,
is the Scriptures, the Hebrew Bible. The Bible is also called Tanakh, which is an acronym in
Hebrew formed from the first letters of the three parts of the Hebrew Biblé~ the Torah (the
first five books), the Nevi'im (Prophets), and the Ketuvim (Writings) hence faNaKh.
In a still wider sense, Torah includes the Written Torah (the Bible) and the Oral Torah
(Talmud), According to the Pharisees, the Oral Torah is the part revelation at Sinai
that Moses did not write down but passed on to his successor rd of mouth. They in
turn passed it on to their successors, When it was eventually written down, the Oral Torah
took the form of the Mishnah and the Gemara ( and Life” in box below). 9)
‘The Gemara consists of commentaries on the Mishnah. Ds
‘There are two major talmuds. The first is the Talmud of Jerusalem, which was compiled? Y
around 400 cz. A second, more sophisticated | was compiled around 600 ce in’ >
(Iraq), where many Jews continued to the end of their captivity there. Sis
rabbis have added more comments to these texts, creating even richer talmuds. _\)
‘The Talmuds are commentaries} , which covers all aspects of life. Iteohitains all
Jewish teaching about what isright and wrong, what should and shoulderiot be done,
including rules about cleanliness} suitable foods, and cooking. A
The Talmuds became of Jewish education. Student learned what important
rabbis had said about varidus questions, and learned to debate, ih favor of and against
various positions. yeshivas, Jewish schools, students pair up to interpret and
debate the questions. On a typical page fromia ‘lalmud, there is at the center a
passage outlining the opposing positions of early rabbis Hillel and
some rule. Above this is a passage Gemara offering comments by
lateritabbjs. Then around the edges of the page more comments.
Bible and the Talmuds, the Jews i a rich body of texts that guided every
aspect of life. Being Jewish meant studyitg these text, following the law as presented in
them, and thas making their ives holy

The Middle Ages 1500 ce)

In the fourth century the Roman emperors made Christianity legal and then made it the

official religion of the Empire. With their new power, Christian leaders often treated Jews

harshly John Chryso8tom, one ofthe most revered ofthe Church Fathers (influential thinkers

in the early centuries of Christianity, whose views are considered authoritative; also known as
~)

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS 8

--- Page 3 ---
Law and Life

The Mishnah is a law code written about 200 ct that interprets the
mitzvot - the plural of mitzvah, “commandment.” For example, the
Mishnah discusses the kinds of work that are prohibited on the Sabbath
(the “seventh” day, commemorating the day on

creating the world). The Bible does not prohibit “work” in

It prohibits melachah, which is the word used in Genesis for

penalty of death. So the rabbis God meant in banning
melachah on the Sabbath were the kinds of work involved in building the
sanctuary, What kinds of work =o} The abi came up wth ths to)
thirty-nine kinds:

F — 16. Spinning 31. Cutting hidewpy”
Se 32. Writing ers

king two loops 33. Erasi letters
Weaving two threads 34.
20. Separating two threads 3%, Jearing a building
21.7ying Oy down
22. Untying 1736. Extinguishing a fire
23. Sewing two sti 37. Kindling a fire
38. Hitting with a
hammer
39. Taking an object from
- the private domain
12. Shearing wool joihe pibleg
13. Washing woo! i transporting an
14. Beating wool . Curing hi ‘object in the public
Bs domain.
15. Dyeing wool, 30. Scraping hide

Uiimateteabbs counted 613 mitzvot.

8 PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 4 ---
O)
Ie,
%
0.
>
Fi % 2
tt t ‘ ee ells, > + bef eit
acaata f A CRERE REE
1H an ae ABE
a ag ipeamprakine ey FEELERS ye i
5 Hota gi i
:
RE #5 cere ab fi ne : |
a vacates isbbsdeet f E
E HrebbycrTPEnrope Hgaaeereeeeeiieti
Mitten a Wey i
iy GREER raReRE 1h ae i a
B sleipsene p aesoeeneeracyee He aH mm :
Ee Ga ae aT
ae taattt !
“eel bebtbatelaeal oe ee nu £9

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS

--- Page 5 ---
“Doctors” of the Church), said that because the Jews had killed Jesus and Jesus was God, the
Jews had killed God. Because of this offense, Chrysostom said, God rejected the Jews once and
for all, so that they were a doomed people who deserved to suffer. This comment ignores the
historical fact that Jesus was executed by the Romans and not “the Jews,” of course, but such
anti-Jewish arguments became common across Christian Europe in the Middle Ages. Many
church synods (meetings of bishops) passed laws surprisingly similar to the laws that Hitler
created in Nazi Germany. In 306 the Synod of Elvira prohibited Christians from marrying
Jews, or even eating with them. The Synod of Clermont in 535 banned Jews from holding
public office. A synod in Toledo, Spain in 681 ordered the public burning of the Talmud and

that Jews could not be plaintiffs against Christians in court, or ‘witnesses against
Christians. The Fourth Lateran Council of 1215, meeting in Rome to which all bishops were
invited, declared that Jews had to mark their clothing witha special badge. The Synod of

Breslau in 1267 set up compulsory ghettoes ~ areas whiere J@WS were required to live. The
Council of Basel in 1434 said that Jews were not obtain university degrees.

‘As we shall see, Christianity underwent a in the 16th century called the
Protestant Reformation. It was designed to its leaders saw as deviations from,

‘What then shall we do with rejected race of Jews? ... First, their synagogues
or churches should be set on fife, and whatever does not burn up covered or
spread over with dirt so: no one may ever be able to see a cinderbr stone oft...

threat of death to teach any more... If however we id that they might harm us
et us drive them out of the count or alltime, (Luther 1543, Part XI)

lid much better in areas ruled by_ As we shall see, in the 7th century, Islam arose
on the Arabian Peninsula and spread’ North Africa to Spain, and east to India and
beyond. The Muslims rejected the claim that the Jews had killed Jesus or God. Their theology,
like Jewish theology, was asi ism with no division of God into three persons.
‘They accepted the Torah as God's revelation. And many of their laws were similar to Jewish
Jaws, such as their: jon on eating pork and other dietary rules. Jews did especially well
in Spain while it was by Muslims from 711 to 1492. There they made up more than
5% of the pop (in the United States today Jews are around 2% of the population).

‘One of the dst important Jewish thinkers, Moses Maimonides (d. 1204), lived in
Spaift Tn this relatively open multicultural environment, there was a great deal of
i Jews, Christians, and Muslims — interaction that included discussions
of religious matters. In this context, Maimonides felt compelled to extract basic Jewish

from the Mishnah. He identified 13 basic Jewish beliefs:
~)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 6 ---
God is the perfect Creator of all things.

God is one in a unique way.

God is not physical.

God and only God is to be worshipped.

Prophets are special creatures who speak for God.

‘Moses is the greatest of the prophets; he spoke to God face to face.
God revealed the Torah to Moses.

‘The Torah is complete. y
10. God knows all human actions.

11. God rewards and punishes people in this life and in the wotld to

12. The Messiah will come.

13. The dead will be resurrected.
from the traditional style of commentary on the law. ese thirteen basic principles
eventually were accepted by the majority and remain central in Judaism to this day.
Another approach to Judaism that arose’in the Middle Ages was the mystical tradition,"
known as Kabbala. Its most famous the Zohar, “The Book of Splen:
written in Spain around 1275 by Moses de Léow, who claimed that it came from
the 2nd century. The Zohar is a mysti on the first five books of
and discusses the nature of Godp the human souls, and good and.e¥il. In the
Zohar, God is described as rather than simple, and than
unchanging. God has emotionis, What is more, God has male and female aspects, and they
must be joined to maintain harmony in the universe. (va

A later movement by mystical Judaism was Hasidisei)Which arose in Eastern
Europe in the 18th century. It emphasized the emotional si so that music,
dancing, and states of ecstasy could be part of worship. in centered around a
leader who le, pious love of God. Hasidic J that this holy man has a
ial relationship to God, and following his will bring blessings. The most
Hasidic group is the movement of Rebbe Menachem
(4. 1994) of Brooklyn, New York, Sint his death in 1994, many of his followers
of him as the Messiah. \

eexanawne

The Modern Period. (1730 to the present)

The Enlightenment. av”

Until the 18th century, all Jéws were what we would today call Orthodox. They believed that
the entire Torah was bby God in just the words we have now, so that whatever it says
is literally true. the rules in the Mosaic law and lived apart from Christians in
noe ea sh ea a deca avons Se es

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS r*)

--- Page 7 ---
FIGURE 6.5 Rebbe Menachem Sehneerson. 2. Radoven/

BibleLandPctures

and culture changed the lives of many Jews, much as they changed the rest of Furopean
culture. The general name for these changes is the Enlightenment, and the Enlightenment
within Jewish culture is called Hagkelah,

The Development of)Reform Judaism

The intellectual and political changes brought by the Enlighitesiment influenced Jewish
thinkers in thellth, century. With the flowering of democracy, North American and some
European governments granted civil and political rights)to Jews. This led many Jews to
reject their tfaditional segregation from the rest of Society. In the 19th century, more and
more Jews stopped thinking of themselves as outsidets; they wanted to live as full citizens of
their epuntries. They stopped dressing in special ways and speaking in Yiddish, a dialect of
German traditionally used by European Jews. They pursued careers in law, medicine, and
university teaching. They began to integrate into the cultures where they lived and immerse
themselves in the intellectual and cultural life of their nations. Many came to prominence,
including some of the scholars mitntioned in this study ~ such as Karl Marx, Sigmund
Freud, and Emile Durkheim,

As Jews began to jintegrate into their national cultures, some aspects of the
traditional laws receded” in importance. Indeed, the changes in European society
brought by the Enlightenment led to a rethinking of Judaic practice that resulted in
Reform Judaism?

Reform Judaism is 2 movement that started in Germany and France in the 19th
century, butflourished in the United States. Whereas traditional Judaism had emphasized
the Talmud, Reform Jews emphasized the study of scripture. And instead of reading the
Bibles word-for-word dictation from God, they read it in a new way. (As we shall see,

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 8 ---
The Enlightenment

‘The Enlightenment was a broad set of intellectual developments that
accompanied socioeconomic and political changes in Europe, beginning
in the 17th century. Four significant areas experiencing change were
(1) cosmology, our understanding of the universe, (2) epistemology, our

understanding of how we know, (3) ethics (or morality), and (4) political thought.

All these developments had important consequences for religion.

First were changes in cosmology. From ancient times through the Mi
‘Ages, people thought of the earth as the center of the universe, with the sun,
moon, and the stars circling around it. This, of course, made humans feel
important. A few passages in the Bible seem to back up this
(earth-centered view), and the 2nd-century thinker Ptolemy.

‘complete system of astronomy. However, starting around 1

such as Copernicus and then Galileo proposed that the

‘sun. With the invention of better

universe is immense, and that the Earth is far from the of everything. This

realization challenged the geocentrism of the

Second were changes in epistemology, the study of knowledge and belief. In the
ancient and medieval world, the authority tion was taken for granted. People
believed something was true based on it was true - a characteristic of oral,
cultures. Revelation, considered to of God, was the
truth, Those who was aligeed
rabbis and priests, were also
silent, the word of
the ancient Greek
for example, and
belief that
‘what other
forit’
top 's mast, and found ‘that they hit

were the start of the modern i
is not an individual's or an insti
irical observation and.

If experts such as Aristotle and, could be wrong about physics and
astronomy, what about experts rs of religion? Should people accept the
interpretations of scripture by the religious authorities, or were
individuals — using their = able to understand scripture’s teachings?

know that the version of scripture we are reading
‘we sure that we know the exact meanings of the words
we are reading a translation from an ancient text?

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS 8

--- Page 9 ---
A third major developmentin the Enlightenment was in people's understanding
of right and wrong ~ ethics or morality. in the Hebrew Bible, doing what is right
is doing what God commands, and doing what is wrong is doing what God
forbids. Ethics is a matter of obedience and disobedience. (As we saw in Chapter
3, this is known as “Divine Command” Ethics.) This understanding was questioned
by Enlightenment thinkers. They reasoned that when God commands something,
either he has a reason for giving that command or he has no reason. If God gives
commands for no reason, then he is a despot or an autocrat, terms with a rather
negative connotation in Enlightenment Europe. Since people think of God as
good, it must be that God gives commands for a reason. Furthermore, most
divine commands - such as those calling for honestyiand concem for the needy,
and those forbidding murder and theft ~ obvi to benefit human
beings. So, as Enlightenment thinkers examined right and wrong, they
looked for the effects of actions on people, for t an action would harm
or benefit someone. If there were rules t ancient people but would
not benefit people today, Enlightenment thinkers tended to consider these rules
as no longer applicable. They must beneficial at some point in human.)
history, but they were no longer . They had become obsolete.
There were also changes in political thought. Before the 18th
standard understanding Jasias Got thar ithe was tage
to them. This ideaicame to Be’called the Divine Right of Kings, butit'yoes back
at least to the Bible, God chooses Saul, then David, on. In the
Christian New/Testameftt, Paul says that all authority is frony'Go& (Romans 13:1).
However, thinkers, many of them and Christians,
view of political authority ~ “rule by the people.”
Enlightenment thinkers argued that the authority tolgovern people comes from
those themselves. A government that ithout this authority would
. This idea led to a number: itions, including the American
jin 1776 and the French in 1789. It is in this context that
begin to see a clear disti between religious and political
authority — and with it, a distincti religion and politics.

\

Christian scholars were Woifig the same thing.) In this perspective, the Bible was indeed
divine revelation, not taken as literal history or science. It was read as a guide
for people li bs bianco teil sons aes fies
purposeful humai existence. Reform Jews also changed their synagogue rituals to be
more to the congregation. Instead of Hebrew, they used the vernacular, the
local .
In the new Reform movement, as in traditional Judaism, the most important feature

jon was ethics. However, the emphasis was now on the ethical principles of the

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 10 ---
Kashrut

Judaic dietary laws are known as kashrut. This is the system of rules
about what foods are acceptable and unacceptable, and how certain
foods must be prepared. Of the animals that live in the water, only those
that have both fins and scales are acceptable. So fish are kosher
(proper), but clams, oysters, and lobsters are trefa (or tre, literally meaning meat
that was killed by wild animals rather than being properly slaughtered, but
generally applied to all food that is forbidden). Of the four-legged animals’
live on land, only those that have split hooves and chew the cud maybe
So sheep and cattle are kosher, but not pigs or foxes.

Acceptable animals must be slaughtered according to a specifelfitual called
shehitah. The slaughterer says a prayer and then draws a r across
the animal's neck to sever the main arteries. Blood may not $0 after
most of the blood is drained from the carcass, itis soaked fed to eliminate
any residual blood.

A prohibition in Exodus . as 24: ard ron 14:21 says,
“You shall not boil a kid in its mother's milk. is passage, the rabbis
derived the rule that meat and dairy products may not be eaten at the same time,

cy nine sige pn soe

cutlery, and table linens for serving meat aniGairy products.
Many Jews follow modified such as avoiding pork and
but not keeping separate dishes and itensils for meat and dairy.
Muslim dietary laws \t are virtually identical to
Acceptable meat is cal (@s opposed to forbidden or
areas without halal but ps, Muslims often shop for
These rules were deriyed from the Bible, mostly the books,
‘As we saw in Chapter 4,

\

Enlightenment, which were moral 1 any reasonable person could discover. Many
of the 613 mitzvot were seen as in Reform Judaism. God wants us to tell the
truth, be honest in our alings, help the poor, and be concerned about social
justice. However, whatever had been served by, for example, the rule against
shatnes ~ wearing Tade of two materials ~ that rule is now obsolete. So the
ethics of Reform Judai much like the ethics of other religious groups influenced
by the Enlight ‘Central was an emphasis on social justice. Instead of worrying
sheet Sage les emer at i a epi ne

‘THE FAMILY OF WESTERN MONOTHEISMS: JEWISH, CHRISTIAN, AND ISLAMIC TRADITIONS
