
--- Page 1 ---
will be true in the future. And whatever else exists beyond the three divisions of time,
that also is indeed Om. What is the essence of Om? It is the eternal vibration of
awareness.

‘The idea that Brahman, Ultimate Reality, is eternal and is the same as the Self implies that
the Self is eternal. As the Katha Upanishad puts it,

‘The Self, whose symbol is Om, is the omniscient Lord. He is not born. He does not die.
He is neither cause nor effect. The Ancient One is unborn, imperishable, eternal:
though the body be destroyed, he is not killed.

This teaching is linked to two more new ideas in the Upanishads ~ reincarnation
and karma - and it has deep implications for human life and happiness. Since the
Self cannot be destroyed, what we call death is only the ion of the body, which
is a mere vehicle of the real Self. The Self 10 be reborn in another body.
‘What kind of body that is depends on its p If the person lived a good li
then the Self will be reborn as a higher kind being. If the person lived a

life, then the Self will be reborn into a te, as a person of lower social
or perhaps even as an animal, All this automatically because of karma =a we
saw in Chapter 2, the law of cause and effect that constitutes the natural juttice of
the universe, Good actions lead to good consequences and bad actions [eid to bad

consequences.
‘etionsoF a good ifet And what haps when people
manage to achieve it? cycle of rebirths go on forever? The Upanishads teach that

the ultimate goal of, to escape or “be released from” samsara, the cycle of
rebirths. This, rebirth is called moksha, and the wayto achieve itis to recognize
the illusory the material world and realize that one’s true nature is indeed
Brahman. ize one’s true self (At man) and itsidentity with Brahman, each person
must! of attachment to material thi

people were more concerned with how to deal
moving toward correct awareness and detachment
from the material world. And so examples of exemplary lives became widely popular.
‘These examples are provided in the texts of the classical age of what we now call Hinduism.
These texts reflect \cient Vedic teachings about the gods and Upanishadic
philosophy.

‘The major text#of this period were two great epics - the Ramayana and the Mahabharata,
some stories ‘the gods called the Puranas, and moral and legal codes called the Laws
of Manu, '*)

THE /ANA The first of the great epics was the Ramayana, about King Rama and his
if Sita. Ravana, the evil ten-headed king of Lanka, abducted Sita and tried to force her to

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS.

--- Page 2 ---
FIGURE 7.3 Arjuna and Krishna. © Frédécc SoltarvCorbis.

y.

~4
marry him. But Rama, with the help of Hanuman, a monkey descended from godsyreSeued
her with his monkey army. Ramaruled as gn ideal king, with Sita as his ideal wifee Thi story
became so popular that temples to) Ramfa and Sita were built across India, and@eventually
Rama was sad tobe an incarnation ofthe great god Vishnu. @,
‘THE MAHABHARATA Narre ern Hine i ihe nan. Woh 74200
verses, it is the longest poerf in the world. The story has been siungland danced and acted
thousands of times, In the late 1980s, Indian television broadeast 94 episodes of the story,

which drew huge audiences. When the series was shownoh BBC television in the U.K,, it

drew 5,000, an audience unheard of for a progtam shown in the afternoon.
The ita revolves around a great (1 struggle between two sets of cousins

wi from King Bharata. The stoty favors the Pandava family, whom the

other fathily, the Kauravas, try to cheat out of their share of the kingdom. The conflict leads
to awar in which the Pandava warrior yn is guided by his chariotee, Krishna, who i
the god Vishnu in human form. <

Before the fighting starts, Arjuna asks Krishna whether he should take part in a war that
will slaughter many of his own felatives. Krishna answers that it is a duty to fight for what
is right when there is no non-Violent alternative, and that when one’s motivation is altruistic
(pure) rather than selfish thé violence will not result in negative karma. So the negative
effects of the violence(will not attach themselves to his soul, dooming him to further rounds
of reincarnation. THe word for doing “what is right” and “one’s duty” is thus the same:
dharma, Arjungind Krishna's discussion takes up 18 chapters of the Mahabharata. These

)

330 MILLION GODS ~ OR NONE: TWO TRADITIONS FROM INDIA

--- Page 3 ---
18 chapters are called the Bhagavad Gita. Combining an engaging story with philosophy
and moral teaching, it is among the most beloved of Hindu scriptures.

As Krishna and Arjuna get into their conversation about the war, many other topics
come up, such as the nature of the Self and the nature of the gods. Krishna reaffirms the
eternity and indestructibility of the Self, and adds another new idea. He says that the
Ultimate Reality underlying everything is a personal god who loves human beings
and becomes human himself to help them. Krishna, an avatar (manifestation) of
Vishnu, says

1am the universal father,

mother, granter of all, grandfather, Yy
object of knowledge, purifier,

holy syllable om, threefold sacredilo

Lam the way, sustainer, lord,

y and reach me! (9:17-28)

In the Upanishads, as the Ultimate Reality is Brahman, which is not a person.
However, in the Ukimate Reality is a person — the god Krishna — and not only
is Krishna a he appears to help Arjuna in his time of need. By implication,
Krishna cares abolit all human beings and is willing to help them. Therefore, the Bhagavad
Gita provides & new way to understand reality, Rather than focusing on Brahman, an
esoteric metaphysical principle, the Gita focuses on a personal, loving god who befriends
ings and even becomes one himself. This idea of a loving God becoming human

ip people is similar to the Christian teaching that God became a man in Jesus to redeem

r*) PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 4 ---
FIGURE 7.4 Woman bending all
backwards ~ hatha yoga. N)
Mehmet Oisa/Shutterstock Images »)

Today in Western societies, when most a ee they think
of hatha yoga, a discipline that combines bodily movements and postures with
conscious breathing. This system was developed by Hindu yogis, holy men, as a
way to prepare the body for long period: itation. It is part of jnana yoga,

the yoga of knowledge, which fostérs thé realization that the Atman, the tru®
Self, is identical with Brahman, Ultimate Reality. Hindus and non-Hindus,
practice hatha yoga find ss other benefits too, such as relakation,
Feduction of stresinineteased strength and flexibility, and betfef blood
circulation. >

In this passage Shvetashvatara Upanishad, translatéd'by Max Miller
(see Chapter), the pHysical discipline of hatha yoga is link with meditation:

Holding hi steady with the head, neck and pp
And cai ‘senses with the mind to enter

A 1n with the Brahma-boat will cross,
fear-bringing streams. \

ipressing his breathings here in the body, and having his movements checked,
One should breathe through his nosttjls With diminished breath.
Like that chariot yoked with pe a
His mind the wise man shouldyrestrain undistractedly....
When the nature of the selfjes with a lamp,
A practicer of Yoga behglds here the nature of Brahma, Unbom, steadfast, from

every nature frees)

By knowing God off is released from all fetters.

creme

--- Page 5 ---
FIGURE 7.5 Statue of Sarasvati autsidl music college in
Puttaparthi. Tim Gainey/Alamy,

the world, but according to the Hindu. epics God manifests himself in many forms (has
many avatars).

In classical Hinduism, as in @hristianity, too, God not only loves human beings but
wants devotion and love from’them in return. This love of and devotion toward God is
called bhakti, and it is Ongof three margas — “paths” or “ways of life” — described in the
Bhagavad Gita. Each matga is also described as a yoga, a religious discipline. The way of
devotion, bhakti yoga, gets the most attention in the Bhagavad Gita, and it became the
most popular tradition in India, as it still is. When people surrender themselves to God
in love, they'dtop their ordinary selfishness and live better lives. Indeed, the Bhagavad
Gita says that such full loving devotion will make up for any bad karma. “Letting go all
dharma, take refuge in me alone,” Krishna says. “I shall deliver you from all sins; do not
grieve.” (18:66)

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 6 ---
The second marga or way of life is jnana yoga, the way of knowledge. This consists
largely of meditation and study of the scriptures. Like bhakti yoga, jnana yoga can
counterbalance a person's bad karma. Just as fire turns wood to ashes, Krishna says, so the
fire of knowledge destroys bad karma.

The third marga, karma yoga, is the way of action. Itis based on not just any action, but
unselfish action. One is acting not to gain a reward but simply to carry out one’s dharma,
one's duty. Different people have different dharmas based on their social status and their
karma.

THE PURANAS The Puranas are stories about the gods, dating from 300 scB=1000 ce,
ins Ga ecg Ce aad cng gee
the Puranas some of the older gods of the Vedas, such as Indra and Varuna, are ignored.
Other older deities are given new roles. The goddess Sarasvati, for :» becomes the
patron of learning and the arts.

‘Three deities that were unimportant in the Vedas become central it Puranas, and in
classical Hinduism - the gods Vishnu and Shiva, and the:

Vishnu is a god who works for righteousness. When declines, he manifests
himself to help the human race get back on track. One of the describes two dozen
avatars of Vishnu, but ten is a more standard m ‘most famous is Krishna, the

charioteer of Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gita. Another is Rama in the Mahabaharta. The
Buddha, founder of a tradition that split off from Hinduism, is a third avatar of Vishnu. In? Y
the future, Hindus say, Vishnu will appear Kalki, a Messiah-like igure who will”
destroy evil and restore moral order. \
Most Hindus today, as we said, the path of devotion to a god, and mahy are
devoted to Vishnu. They are called! ”

The second major god in the Puranas and in classical Hinduism is Shiva/a god quite
different from Vishnu. He of opposed features; he is creator ani destroyer, he is
helpful and threatening. There are three main images of Shiva. The fitstis as creative power.
Here Shiva is represented by/a lingam, a shaft that some scholarsdeScribe as an erect penis
symbolizing the creative power of sex, set in a yoni, a nedning the origin of life
and represented as oan be colar iterpet ae representing» sort of
mini-temple.

AnothePjimage of Shiva is as Lord of the by dancing that Shiva creates the
later, when it is beyond repair, destroys it.
way Shiva is represented is as ing ascetic - someone who has

renounced worldly possessions and pleats - similar to today’s sachus, wandering
holy men.

Hindus who are devoted mail} Shiva are called Shaivites or Shalvas. Worshippers
(or “devotees”) of Shiva and worshippers of Vishnu can be distinguished by the designs

painted on their foreheads.
Shaivites paint horizofital bands across their foreheads for ritual purposes, while
Vaishnavites paint vertical lines on theirs.
Along with of Vishnu and Shiva, the other most popular form of devotion is to

the Goddess, whiése most universal name is Devi. While there are several names and
~)

330 MILLION GODS ~ OR NONE: TWO TRADITIONS FROM INDIA


--- Page 7 ---
FIGURE,7.6 Shivaigs‘Lord of the Dance.
© Paul PreseatyStockghoto,

FIGURE 7.7 Shaivite with marks on
forehead. stuart ForstevAlamy.

--- Page 8 ---
FIGURE 7.8 Vaishnaviteliyith marks on
ferhend 6 haggeenatcs

descriptions of goddesses in the Puranas, for many Hindus they are all forshs/of one great
Goddess. Some of the Puranas deSeribe her as the wife of Shiva and as his SMakti his power.
Other texts treat her as the supreme divinity who created the universe, the ultimate mother.
Whe pore ng tara he oy ort Wen
she is seen as the destroyer of evil, she may be called Kali, a frightening figure who wears a
meee GF tse eh; ele CLP —

THE LAWS\OF MANU By 200 ce a set of legal and.moral codes had been created that
fo traditional Indian social practices into’sets of four: the Four Varnas (social
Four Ends of Man, and the Four Stages of Life.

‘As we have seen, at the top of the FoufVarnas are the brahmins, the elite priestly class
who perform rituals and study the scripgifes. Second are the kshatriyas, the warrior ruling
class. Third are the vaishyas, merchant# who also do farming and cowherding. The kshatriyas
and the vaishyas may study the Vedas but not teach about them. The fourth varna is the
shudras, the peasants. Unliketb8se above them, they are not allowed to study the Vedas or
to build up wealth,

‘The varnas are not thésame as the castes of Indian society, although the two systems are
related. The varnas ae scripturally validated; in fact, as we saw in Chapter 2, the Rig Veda
describes how the) were created through the sacrifice of the cosmic man, Purusha. From his

330 MILLION GODS ~ OR NONE: TWO TRADITIONS FROM INDIA

--- Page 9 ---
FIGURE 7.9 Dalits, Untouchables, at an anti-government rally, 2006. Raveendran/AtR/
Gerty Images

mouth came the brahmins, from his arms came the kshatriyas, from)his thighs came the
vaishyas, and from his feet came the shudras. The castes are called jati, and they are not
religiously sanctioned. They reflect an individual's identification with a particular extended
family and commuhity, locale, and livelihood. Like the varn38, one is born into the jati, and
mixing withithose of other jatiis traditionally prohibited®But unlike the varnas, the jati are
receding into“history as India modernizes, industrializes, and urbanizes. The caste system
has actually been outlawed in modern India, although remnants of it survive.

Below all of these varnas and jati are dalitsthe Untouchables. They are outside the caste
Gstem, outcastes. They must do the jobsuthat are too defiling for others to do, such as
handling corpses, hauling garbage, and cleaning toilets. Most live in poverty. They are
considered to be in a permanentstate of impurity, so other Hindus are not supposed to
touch them or eat with them. Théy must even drink from separate wells. Mahatma Gandhi,
the great leader of modern India, called them harijans, children of God, and worked to
climinate the caste systeriayrhich held them at the bottom of society. He made friends with
Untouchables and ate with them. Nonetheless, the dalits - some 20% of the population —
are still the pooresttpeople in India.

‘The Laws of Manu thus authorize a strict social hierarchy. It is divided not only by social
class but also'by gender. Even women from the upper classes are considered servants of men.
Accordingto Manu, girls and women should not act on their own. “Nothing must be done
indepéadently by a girl, by a young woman, or by an old woman, even in her own house. As
agifl,a female must submit to her father, as a young woman, to her husband, and when her

PART Il USING THE TOOLS: SURVEYING WORLD RELIGIONS

--- Page 10 ---
FIGURE 7.10 Carvings on the outside of Khajuraho Yemple.
© Prisma/Superstock

lord is dead, to her sons. A woman must never be independent.” (Manu 5.137148) Another
rule}lis that wives owe their husbands total devotion. “Though he lacks virtue, and is
unfaithfél to his wife, and has not good qualitieSya husband must be constantly worshipped
as a god by a faithful wife.” (Manu 5.154)

The Laws of Manu also describe the,Four Ends of Man. These are the four main goals
people pursue. The first is karria ~ pleasure, The second is artha — wealth, success, and
power. Third is dharma — righteOustiess or duty. And the fourth is moksha — liberation from
the cycle of death and rebirthiy These four goals are not ranked; the Laws of Manu simply
describe how different people follow different goals.

In Indian tradition, the pursuit of pleasure is not discouraged. One of the scriptures is the
Kama Sutra, about kama, pleasure, and it gives advice about increasing sexual pleasure.
Some Hindu temples, too, have statues of figures in various sexual positions - see Figure 7.10.

330 MILLION GODS ~ OR NONE: TWO TRADITIONS FROM INDIA
