
--- Page 1 ---
1

Benefits in the Religious System
Settings and Dynamics

Hozanji is a Buddhist temple situated on the upper slopes of the
Ikoma Hills that separate the city of Osaka from the plains around the
ancient Japanese capital of Nara. It is famed as a center of worship of
Kankiten, a deity of Hindu origins and one of those many figures of
worship that have been assimilated into Buddhism through its en-
counters with other religious traditions. Depictions of practices asso-
ciated with the deity and aimed at preventing misfortunes and ac-
quiring the support of Kankiten through ritual worship can be found
in a number of Buddhist texts, such as the Daisho-ten Kangi-shashin bi-
nayaka hé, which, as Alexander Kabanoff notes, describes ritual pro-
cedures to be followed in order to “expel all disasters.”! Kabanoff, in
providing details of other textual references to Kankiten, shows how
this deity came to be transmitted from India to China (and hence to
Japan) as a deity of the Esoteric Tantric tradition. He notes, more-
cover, that the Chinese found Tantrism attractive “not for its philo-
sophic doctrines,” but rather for practical aspects such as the promise
of worldly benefits. Kabanoff’s list of such worldly benefits includes
defeating enemies, becoming wealthy, attaining longevity, dispelling
diseases, securing high positions, and winning somcone’s love? AF
though the veneration of Kankiten flourished in Japanese Esoteric
Buddhism (mikkyo) from around the ninth century, Kabanoff notes
that Kankiten was regarded with a certain ambiguity. The deity con-
tained potentially dark sides as a ferocious and demanding deity as-
sociated inter alia with angry spirits and capable of divine wrath.
Kankiten thus required special veneration and offerings, as well as
pledges of faith and commitment, in order to harness its powers for
the benefit of the petitioner.’

a7

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J, Jr. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 37.
hittpiisite.ebrary.comilibarizona/Doc?id=10015592&ppg=49

--- Page 2 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi.. http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

38 PRracticatty RELGious

Kankiten is known by a variety of other names as well. The most
common is Shoten,t and it is this name, linked to the temple's
geographical location, that gives Hézanji the name by which it is
popularly known: Ikoma Shoten. Hozanji developed as a center of
Kankiten worship from the seventeenth century onward: its founder,
the monk Hézan Tankai, was a worshiper of the deity and hence en-
shrined Kankiten at the temple he founded. Kankiten is not, how-
ever, the honzon, or main image of worship, enshrined at the temple.
(The official honzon at Hozanji is Fudé.)* And, like Japanese temples
and shrines in general, Hézanji is not a location with a single focus of
worship or indeed a single purpose in the benefits it provides. Rather,
it consists of a number of halls of worship and figures of worship that
are scattered through its precincts and enshrine various buddhas and
other deities. Besides Kankiten the temple enshrines Monju (the
Buddha of Wisdom), Kannon (the bodhisattva of compassion), Ji
(the protective bodhisattva), and many others, and its courtyard
contains numerous subtemples housing these and other figures of
worship.

Hozanji features prominently in an extended series of studies of
the religious culture of the [koma Hills carried out bya group of Japa-
nese sociologists of religion during the 1980s and carly 1990s" lida
‘Takafumi, one of the participants in that research project, has de-
scribed the Ikoma Hills as a “marketplace for this-worldly benefits”
(genze riyakw ichiba) and Hézanji specifically as a “mecea for faith in
this-worldly benefits” (genze riyaku shinké no mekka).? Hozanji is but
one, however, of the vast number of shrines and temples of all sizes
that are scattered throughout the Ikoma Hills and cater to the needs
of the people of Osaka and the surrounding region. These include
most notably Ishikiri Shrine, whose deities of worship are famed for
healing and assisting in recovery from surgery, and Chogosonshiji,
better known as Shigisan, whose main figure of worship, Bishamon-
ten, is one of the Seven Gods of Good Fortune (shichifukujin), a popu-
lar group of deities who are commonly depicted as riding together
across the seas in a treasure boat (takarabune) with treasures and
benefits they will distribute to those who seck them. The benefits
Bishamonten offers at Shigisan are diverse, but he is especially active
and efficacious, according to the temple's literature, for business
prosperity, family safety, and the development of good luck.* The rep-
utation of these three places in terms of
benefits is such that each receives several million visitors per year:
all it has been estimated that around 10 million people visit the
shrines and temples of koma cach year, the majority visiting the
three major centers of Hozanji, Ishikiri, and Shigisan.’ All three have
developed networks of religious associations and groups of wor-

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J, Jr.. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 38,
hitpiisite.ebrary.comilibrarizonalDoc?id=10015582&ppg=50

--- Page 3 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi.. http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

Benefits in the Religious System 39

shipers centered on faith in the efficacy of these places in terms of
this-worldly benefits. Besides these major institutions, the Ikoma Hills
are home to hundreds of other shrines and temples of varying sizes
that also attract visitors and adherents.

Hozanji is well known in the region for, among other benefits,
those of shobai hanjo (business prosperity) and fachimono (giving up
something or abstaining from something that is not good for one)."°
Kankiten is, as noted, a potent deity but one that needs to be prop-
erly appeased. In secking Kankiten’s assistance one is not just har-
nessing the deity’s powers of moral support in the struggle for ab-
stention but opening oneself to its wrath if, after pledging abstinence
and asking for its help, one reneges on this commitment.!! Hézanji’s
ema (votive tablets) symbolize this benefit and the commitment it in-
volves: they depict a padlock and are inscribed with the Japanese
ideogram “kokoro” (spirit /mind) to signify mental determination and
the locking of the mind against temptation. On these tablets people
write their wishes and pleas before hanging them up at the temple;
among the petitions, vows, and requests that have been noted by ob-
servers of the Hozanji votive tablets are those for giving up alcohol
stopping illicit relations with a member of the opposite sex, giving u
tobacco, and, reflecting the ways in which pray
fest changing social situations and patterns, gi

According to temple lore, Shoten (Kankiten) will respond to re-
quests that have failed to be realized through petitions at other
shrines and temples:"" in short, this is a deity that is powerful and re~
sponsive especially to those in great need. The power of Kankiten to
grant wishes and benefits is affirmed by the temple's numerous pub-
lications outlining cases of miraculous events experienced by peti-
tioners and worshipers, whose passing on of such stories and rumors
of benefits has played a large part in the development of the temple's
reputation."' Such indeed is the gratitude of successful petitioners
that grateful worshipers often donate large sums of money to the
temple. According to Murata Jahachi, itis not uncommon for believ-
ersto give as much as 1 or 2 million yen when their prayers have been
realized.

Hozanji is a thriving temple, and its steady flow of clients support
a number of commercial enterprises that constitute its monzenmachi,
“the town before the temple gate,” which refers to commercial settle-
ments that have grown around shrines and temples. On the steep
steps leading up to it from the nearest local train station there are a
number of inns as well as shops and food stalls. The numbers of cus-
tomers also help support a cable car railway that runs close by, and al-
though it also leads to the summit of the Tkoma Hills and a large fun-
fair there, many of its passengers are headed for the temple. On

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J, Jr.. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 39,
hitpiisite.ebrary.comilibfarizona/Doc?id=100155928ppg=51

--- Page 4 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

40 PRracticatty RELGious

Sundays, when most people do not have to work, the temple receives
large numbers of visitors who, secking benefits from Kankiten, per-
form various practices ranging from simple acts of veneration—light-
ing a stick of incense, making a small offering of a few coins, pu
chasing a talisman or amulet, praying briefly—to ritual austerities
designed to facilitate this transaction, such as the hyakudo mairi. This
practice, meaning “one hundred times around,” involves walking
around a designated area, usually two stone markers set within a
shrine or temple courtyard, one hundred times to demonstrate one’s
sincerity to a deity when making a request. At Hézanji the hyakudo
mairi is gencrally performed around one of the halls of worship
within the courtyard and is often done barefoot.!®

Figures given by the temple and by Japanese scholars estimate that
it receives around 3 million visitors per year.'? While this figure may
well be somewhat speculative—given that people may access the
temple from a number of different entrances and there isno check at
any of them to assess the flow of visitors—it nonetheless indicates a
gencral feeling by those who have studied the temple and those who
work there that Hozanji receives a fairly large number of visitors."*
« figures themselves imply that an average of 57,000 visitors go to
Hozanji every week. In reality the flow of visitors is a little more un-
even, for there are a number of festive occasions that draw extremely
large crowds, while the normal weekly traffic is rather less, although
still, certainly on Sundays, busy. Hozanji draws its biggest crowds on

cial occasions in the temple's ritual calendar: like most shrines
and temples Hézanji has a series of yearly events and rituals (nenjii
ji) that punctuate the yearly cycle, provide the basic framework for
the temple's general activities, and demarcate its holy days and main
religious observances.

At Hozanji, for example, the first and sixteenth days of each month
are regarded as particularly efficacious days for praying there. These
days are ennichi, a term with multiple but related meanings. Each de-
ity and figure of worship has (like saints in the Catholic tradition) its
own special holy day or days that are pregnant with religious mean-
ing, days on which the deity is especially accessible to petitions and
prayers and when visits to its centers of worship are considered to
have greatest merit, An ennichi is thus the holy day of a deity, the day
{nichi) when the opportunity to develop karmic fortunes, affinities,
and connections (en) with the deity isat its highest. Because itis spe-
cial day in this respect, it may also be a festival day (another related
meaning of ennicht) or a day when a fair or market (also an ennichi)
may be held at the shrine or temple. The multiple meanings of en-
nichi—cncompassing issues of increased sanctity, enhanced karmic
connections, the significance of certain phases in the calendrical

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J, Jr.. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 40,
hitpiisite.ebrary.comilibrarizona/Doc?id=10015592&ppg=52

--- Page 5 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

Benefits in the Religious System 4

cycle as special religious occasions, and the importance of festivity,
commerce, and economic activity—are by no means random. In-
deed, as we shall see throughout this book, all these themes are inter-
twined and form a whole, in which there is little contradiction be-
tween the economic and the spiritual. The economic dimensions of
temple and shrine activity, signified by the ennicki as a commercial
market, do not conflict with the notion that such days are specially
holy days when the deity may be especially responsive to petitioners.
Rather, they reinforce each other: the economic lure of the market
that draws people to the place can increase the numbers who will, in
the course of their visit, pray to the deity; the attraction of a special
receptiveness to petitions on that day will not only bring increased
numbers to the religious center but boost the size of the crowds at the
market and increase its economic potential. Religious events such as
ennichi, occasions of festivity, prayer, and veneration, are equally oc-
casions for economic barter and activity and an opportunity for the
religious institutions themselves to acquire and increase the eco-
nomic support they need to function,

‘The interplay of festivity, economic activity, sanctity, prayer, and
worship permeates Hozanji’s yearly calender. Besides its two monthly
ennichi the temple has a number of other special religious festivals:
the setsubun festival in early February in which rituals are enacted to
drive away evil and beckon the coming of spring and warm weather;
a grand goma (Esoteric Buddhist fire ritual) on April 1; the celebra-
tion of the Buddha's birthday on May 8; and several other events
throughout the year." But the occasion when the greatest crowds visit
the temple are the first three days of the year—the occasion of the
hatsumode or first shrine or temple visit of the year. This event is part
of a wider cycle of social and religious rituals covering the ending of
the old year and the beginning of the new year, rituals full of the sym-
bolism of eradicating the misfortunes and hindrances of the past and
ushering in renewal.”” At New Year it is customary to pay a visit (or in-
deed a series of visits, since many people visit not one but many places
at this time) to a shrine or temple to make a first greeting of the year
to the gods and buddhas. In the process of greeting the gods, itis the
general practice to make wishes and ask favors for the coming year
and acquire various talismans, amulets, and other lucky objects that
are taken home as signs of the spiritual benevolence and protection
of the gods or buddhas.

The number of people who perform hatsumade visits has grown
steadily in Japan in the 1980s and 1990s. According to the figures re-
leased each year by the Japanese police, the numbers of those who
have taken part in this practice have exceeded 80 million (approxi-
mately two-thirds of the entire population) each year-*! Participation

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J, Jr. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 41
hitpiisite.ebrary.comilibarizona/Doc?id=10015592&ppq=53

--- Page 6 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

a2 Practicatty RELGioUs

can be affected slightly by the weather: in 1989, for example, a small
decline in numbers from the previous year was blamed on inclement
weather, while the rise in numbers between 1992 and 1993 was partly
attributed to good weather. But the economic climate is also consid-
cred to influence the turnout. The economic troubles of the 1990s
are scen as closely linked to the increase in the numbers of partici-
pants in hatsuméde, According to interpretations widely circulated
the media, the uncertainties caused by Japan's economic crisis—and
people’s need to “turn to the gods” for reassurance and seek in-
creased help, support, and benefits asa result of that crisis—account
for this growth.” The 1994 figures (coming at a time when the cco-
nomic recession had already gone on longer than many had expected
it to) showed the largest number ever of people performing this rite:
85,440,000, over half a million higher than the year before.”

Every year newspapers publish a list of the most visited religious
centers. The list is usually topped by major shrines and temples such
as Meiji Shrine in Tokyo (which in 1993 received 3.5 million hatsu-
mode visitors); Kawasaki Daishi, a temple in Kawasaki, southwest of
‘Tokyo; and Shinshoji, at Narita, a temple popularly known as Narita-
san and famed as a place to obtain traffic safety amulets and to have
one’s car blessed and placed under divine protection. In the Kansai
(western Japan) region, the most widely visited centers tend to be
Fushimi Inari (widely regarded as the country’s most important
shrine to the deity Inari) in southern Kyoto and Sumiyoshi Shrine in
Osaka. Such religious centers are certainly national in that they at-
tract visitors from across Japan and are usually featured on national
television cach New Year to show the size of the crowds taking part in
this annual ritual.

Hozanji, although it is one of the most important temples dedi
cated to Kankiten in Japan, is not as widely known as the places just
cited. Unlike the famed temples and shrines of Kyoto, it is not re-
garded as a tourist attraction or a special example of Japanese cul-
tural or artistic achievement and hence worthy of a visit to admire its,
architectural splendor or cultural treasures. Moreover, it never makes
it to the “Top Ten” list of the most visited shrines and temples pub-
lished by the newspapers at haisumade, Nonetheless, it receives
around half a million visitors on average during the first three days of
the year, approximately one-sixth of its annual visitors" Along with
businesspeople and merchants who are attracted by Kankiten’s repu-
tation as a source of benefits related to business prosperity, the
temple is especially popular with those who work in Osaka’s *w:
trade” (mizu shobai), the vast nightlife industry in Japan centered
around drinking, bars, nightclubs, and sexual entertainment: praying

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J, Jr.. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 42.
hitpiisite.ebrary.comiliblarizona/Doc?id=10015592&ppq=54

--- Page 7 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

Benefits in the Religious System 43

at koma for Kankiten’s protection and support is seen asa rite of pas-
sage necessary for those wishing to enter this business.**

Hozanji is not what is commonly termed in Japan a bodaiji—that is,
a Buddhist temple with a parish that includes a mumber of house~
holds (danka) affiliated with it and for whom the temple conducts rit-
ual services relating largely to ancestor and mortuary rites. This danka
relationship, and the fees from the temple's services in these contexts,
form the primary economic underpinning for the large majority of
Buddhist temples in Japan. Hézanji has no danka and hence it oceu-
sno fixed place in the social structure of community religion. Eco-
nomically it depends on attracting visitors who will make donations,
purchase amulets, pay for their prayers and petitions to be offered to
Kankiten, and so on. This dependence (which is not limited to
Hozanji but affects any temple in Japan that has no affiliated parish-
ioners or houscholds) is a motivating factor in the development and.
promotion of genz riyaku activities at Hozanji and clsewhere.

The importance of this point, in the present context, is that
Hozanji receives visitors not because of its formal position in Japanese
social structure but because of voluntary associations related to sea-
sonal events, occupational factors, personal needs, and even through
casual circumstances—accompanying a friend or family member
who wishes to make a petition, for example, or while visiting other
laces in the area. As noted carlier, there is a large funfair nearby, a
lite further up the hillside, and people may visit both places during
the course of a day out. Although Hozanji has a sectarian affiliation
(itis in fact a daihonzan, or head temple, of the Shingon Risshii Bud-
dhist sect) its visitors, like those of other popular institut i

000 affiliated members, according to 1994 figures2® consid-
erably less than the number of people who visit Hézanji at New Year.
This nonsectarian nature of shrine and temple visiting and praying
for this-wworldly benefits indicates Hozanji’s accessibility as a center of
the common religion.

We shall encounter Hézanji again in a number of chapters. Here
we have focused on it to emphasize a series of vital points, Hozanji
tells us of a religion that, as noted in the Introduction, is practiced—a
religion that is pragmatic and related to daily reaHlife concerns, to
‘occupational and locational identities (attracting as it does people
from the Osaka water trade), and to seasonal and temporal changes.
The pragmatic nature of religion is demonstrated through Hézanji’s
primary claims to fame and its predominant functions. The temple
deals with the pertinent needs and worries that concern people in all
walks of life, handling all manner of issues from business prosperity

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J, Jt.. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 43,
hitpiisite.ebrary.comilibrarizona/Doc?id=10015592&ppq=55

--- Page 8 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

4 PRracticatty RELGious

to painful addictions. This pragmatism relates to the ways in which
people may visit the temple, as well, and to the flexible nature of re~
ligious veneration in Japan: while some visitors may be driven by ur-
gent personal crises, such asaddiction to drugs or alcohol, others may
be far more casual, dropping in on their way to the funfair or during
ahike in the surrounding hills. There is, for example, a pleasant hike
that can be made from Ishikiri Shrine across the hills to Hézanji (or
vice versa). Temple officiants do not discriminate among the differ-
ent types of visitor: all may be accommodated, none is left out. And
in operating as a protective temple related to a particular industry,
Hozanji tells us also of the extent to which occupation and social ci
cumstance may exert a religious influence on people and, indeed,
frame their religious culture and activities.

In praying and asking for favors, however, people incur moral
obligations and become involved in a scries of ethical considerations
relating to what they should do to thank Kankiten and the duties they
take on when making requests. Given the demanding nature of its
deity, Hézanji informs us of the moral obligations incurred by peti-
tioners and the ethical dimension of their activities. Praying for
benefits implies an obligation to express gratitude for the rewards
that come from prayer. While this obligation need not involve the
large financial donations mentioned earlier, it does necessitate re-
turning the favors granted by expressing gratitude—themes we dis-
cuss more fully in Chapter 3, where we encounter stories of what may
happen when these procedures are not correctly followed and the
dcbis of obligation incurred through prayer and supplication are not
fulfilled. Hozanji’s dependence on the provision of this-worldly
benefits to sustain itself economically informs us also of the neces-
sity for temples and shrines to publicize such issues in order to gain
and maintain customers. Hence the importance of publicizing cases
where benefits have been acquired and affirming the truth claims
(the miracles and efficacious provisions of benefits) that these impl

From Hozanji we can also discern something of the extent of
prayers for this-worldly benefits and the extent of such pragmatic re-

ligious activity in Japan in general. Hozanji, as pointed out earlier,
a flourishing temple specializing in this-worldly benefits: it receives
large numbers of petitioners not just at special occasions such as ha-
tsuméde but throughout the year. Yet itis only one of a number of re~
ligious centers in the Kansai region around Osaka and Kyoto and is
by no means the most famous of them. It is only one of many centers
catering to various forms of this-worldly benefits even within the
Tkoma region. Nonetheless it can still count its visitors in the millions.
Although the extent of praying for practical benefits is infinitely
difficult to discern in statistical terms, the indicators suggest it is ex-

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J, Jr.. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 44,
hitpiisite.ebrary.comiliblarizona/Doc?id=10015592&ppq=56

--- Page 9 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

Benefits in the Religious System Ea

tremely widespread. The hatsuméde figures alone would suggest so,
and while one cannot—given its special nature as a social and cul-
tural occasion—claim that this particular occasion is representative of
Japanese religious practice, it does show the popularity of seasonal
and calendrical occasions with religious themes. High levels of par-
ticipation in religious occasions and events are a recognized charac-
teristic of Japanese religion in general, as is its concern with secking
this-worldly bencfits.?” The extent of this practice is indicated in var-
ious major surveys of religious attitudes such as those carried out by
the Japanese Broadcasting Network (NHK). The responses to the
1983 NHK survey, to cite but one example, show a high level of activ=
ity related to the acquisition and use of amulets and talismans, objects
that are closely associated with the pursuit of practical benefits: the
numbers using such charms cither often or sometimes were around
75 percent of all respondents, with a high point of 80 percent for
those in their twenties and thirties.** The extent of such prayers may
be more discernible when one looks at specific needs, occupations,
and situations, As has often been observed, for example, many stu
dents follow the common practice of praying for success before thi
school or university entrance examinations.

In introducing Hozanji we are in effect rejecting the notion that
religion is irrelevant in Japanese society and culture, an impression
suggested by Reischauer and Jansen and gleaned by artificial ques-
tions about belief and “true religion.” Such an impression falls apart
when we look at what happens on a day-to-day basis at such religious
centers. Hézanji tells us of a genuine and practiced religious. cul-
ture, concerned with ordinary needs, deeply embedded in Japanese
society.

Comprehensive Responses:
Types and Extent of Practical Benefits
The benefits offered at Hézanji, such as business prosperity and as-
ince in giving up harmful addictions, arc just a sample of the many
and varying forms of benefits that may be had at shrines and temples
in Japan. Their scope and extent are enormous, relating to every con-
ceivable need, aspiration, and circumstance of individuals and social
groups. Nor are they static. New forms and variations m: ar at
any time in line with changing social and individual needs, the de-
mands of petitioners, and the inventiveness of religious officiants.
Here we outline their general scope and extent while indicating how
new forms of benefit may emerge.

It is possible to discern two main divisions in the forms of benefits
that are proffered at shrines and temples: benefits that relate to pro-

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J, Jt. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 45,
hitpiisite.ebrary.comilibrarizonalDoc?id=100155928ppg=57


--- Page 24 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi.. http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

60 PRracticatty RELGious

duced a service and charm that addressed their needs—is comple-
mented by an inventiveness and occasionally an opportunism, the
impetus for which frequently comes from priests and religious spe
cialists who are adept at discerning trends, recognizing new areas of
need, and creating new benefits in line with them, This is an impor-
tant dimension of practical benefits because it pertains to the ways in
which the promises of benefits are made and how they—and hence
the religious institutions and figures—are proselytized, dissemi-
nated, and even manipulated. In Chapter 6 we discuss the marketing
and promotion of benefits and return to the creation of new bencfits
in response to changing necds.

Practical Benefits, Religious Institutions,
and Ritual Processes: The Case of Kawasaki Daishi

Religious institutions need not cater only to one category of
worldly benefits but may provide an extensive year-round service
dealing with all manner of necds, ritual services, and religious objects
that relate to benefit ict we gained some insights into this theme
in our discussion of Hozanji, Here we examine in some depth a
temple we have already mentioned: Kawasaki Daishi, What underpins
the sacred nature and reputations of religious centers? What is the
calendrical cycle of praying for benefits? In what ways can benefits be
sought? What ritual processes and religious objects are associated
with them? While these topics are discussed in later chapters, itis im-
portant to offer some introductory remarks here.

Kawasaki Daishi is the name by which the temple Heikenji is
known throughout Japan. Like many other religious centers, it has
become famed under its popular rather than official name: “Daishi”
refers to its main figure of worship, K6b6 Daishi, the posthumous
name of Kikai, the Buddhist monk active in Japan at the end of the
cighth and beginning of the ninth centuries. The founder of Shingon
Buddhism in Japan as well as important religious centers such as the
temple Taji in Kyoto and Koyasan south of Osaka, Kitkai has a huge
reputation as a religious teacher, practitioner, and Japanese cultural
hero. After his death—or, as his later followers would have it, after
his entry into eternal meditation in his mausoleum at Koyasan—he
‘was eventually granted the posthumous title Kobo Daishi by the im-
perial court in the year 921. By then legends affirming that he was still
alive and capable of performing miracles, interceding to help th
faithful and punish the wicked, had begun to develop, promoted
great part by priests and wandering ascetics connected with the Shin-
gon Buddhist sect and with Kayasan.

KObd Daishi is one of the most important and frequently peti-
tioned providers of benefits in Japanese religion: prominent as a

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J, Jr.. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 60,
hitpiisite.ebrary.comiliblarizonalDoc?id=10015592&ppq=72

--- Page 25 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

Benefits in the Religious System 61

figure of worship in numerous pilgrimages, he isalso venerated at nu-
merous temples suich as Kawasaki Daishi in Japan, and many other
temples have acquired special sanctity by claiming him (usually with
a degree of poctic license) as their founder.™ Although Kikai, as the
founder of a particular sect of Buddhism in Japan (Shingon), has
specific sectarian associations, in his subsequent guise as Kobo Daishi
he has transcended these boundaries and, through his reputation as
a provider of benefits and performer of miraculous intercessions, has
become venerated not only at Shingon temples but across the spec-
trum and is prayed to by people regardless of their sectarian affilia-
tion or orientation.

Kawasaki Daishi is one of the most visited religious institutions in
it is the most frequently visited Buddhist temple at hatsumade;
shrine in Japan that receives more visitors at this time of year
n the heart of Tokyo. Although it is of the Shingon
sect, those who visit come from all walks of Japanese religious life and
their main concerns are in the powers of the temple and of Kobo
Daishi to grant benefits to them.* The temple’s fame comes from the
reputation of Kab Daishi and its foundation story (engi), which
sacralizes the temple and allots immense sacred power to its main im-
age of worship, a statue of Kob6 Daishi.

Foundation legends (engi) affirm the sacrality of a location and
play an important role in constructing an image of power. In the
Introduction we encountered the foundation legend of Ichibata
Yakushi, in which a pious fisherman found a miraculous statue of
Yakushi, who restored his blind mother's sight; as a result of this
miracle and his faith, a temple centered on this statue was founded
and became known for healing eye problems. Such legends may well
have been invented by priests in order to provide religious institu-
tions or sacred images with a reputation for efficacy (or indeed as a
post hoc legitimation for the existence of a religious institution and
as an affirmation of its power) and are widely publicized as a means
of creating faith and encouraging the faithful to visit religious insti-
tutions. Although they often have no historical veracity, engi repre~
sent a living religious tradition—an exposition of what has in other
contexts been described as “mythistory,”® the mythic construction of
a tradition that speaks of religious truth and validity and provides a
form of historical origin. As such, engi are potent tools in the prosely=
tization of religion and religious efficacy, and their use in affirming
the powers of specific locations and images has been seminal in the
formation of Japanese religious culture and the development of net
works of popular religious centers and pilgrimage routes.»!

In the case of Kawasaki Daishi its engi connects the temple to its
main figure of worship, Kobo Daishi, who although he never visited
the site is nonetheless considered to be present and active there. Ac

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J, Jr.. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 61
hitpiisite.ebrary.comilibrarizonalDoc?id=100155928ppq=73

--- Page 26 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi.. http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

62 Practicatty RELGioUs

cording to various versions of the engi, Kiikai (KOb6 Daishi) carved a
statue of himself in his fortysecond year. In common Japanese re
gious belicf (derived from Taoist influences) the forty-second year is
the yakudoshi, or dangerous year, for men—a year when they are e=
pecially open to misfortune and should take steps to protect them-
selves by calling on the gods and buddhas. Praying for the eradication
of dangers—yakuyoke—is a major category of benefit secking, and
yakudoshi-related prayers and actions are one of the most prevalent
occasions when this occurs.

K6b6 Daishi is a prominent source of protection in Japanese reli-
gion with regard to the yakudoshi. Because Kitkai was a historic:
figure, it has been possible to attribute to him numerous actions that
(s0 legend avers) he performed in order to avoid the spiritual dan-
gers of his age and possible, too, to construct various legends that re-
late to actual things linked to K6bé Daishi, such as pilgrimages he
is said to have created or statues he is said to have carved. In 815
(Kitkai’s forty-second year), for example, legends state that he walked.
around Shikoku, the island of his birth, founding the island's cighty-
cight-stage pilgrimage route, which is focused on Kobo Daishi.® AF
though this pilgrimage story is historically inaccurate (the pilgrimage
did not come into existence until centuries later, and as far as is his
torically known Kiikai was not in Shikoku in 815), it provides a leg-
endary impetus and foundation myth to the pilgrimage by associating
itwith the sacred figure at its heart. It also affirms the value of the pil-
grimage asa religious action designed to safeguard one against dan-
gers such as the yakudoshi. Many pilgrims do indeed perform it in
their dangerous years.*

Among the other activities attributed to Kitkai/K6bo Daishi in
connection with his own forty-second year was the carving of various
statues and images of worship. The statue at Heikenji (Kawasaki
Daishi) is onc of these and, according to the temple's engi, after carv=
ing a statue of himself he cast it into the sea. The subsequent where-
abouts of the statue were revealed in the twelfth century to Hirama
Akinori, a retainer of the powerful Minamoto clan, to whom Kobo
Daishi appeared in a dream. Using the services of a priest from
Koyasan, Hirama founded a temple enshrining this statue: the
temple took its official name from the on, or Chinese readings, of the
two ideograms of his name (hei and ken). Since Hirama had founded
the temple in his forty-second year, there are strong associations with
various forms of yakuyoke and the temple has become, in the words of
one of its priests, a center for yakuyoke shinko (faith in preventing dan-

.°? The temple's fame derives from its dual associations with Kobo
Daishi—both as carver and original sacralizer of the main image and
as the main image itself. Thus the statue is a spiritual manifestation of

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J., Jr. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 62.
hitpiisite.ebrary.comilibrarizona/Doc?id=10015592&ppq=74

--- Page 27 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi.. http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

Benefits in the Religious System 63

KObd Daishi and the intercessionary and protective powers he is be-
lieved to possess. This sanctity is further reinforced by the miraculous
founding legend that brought the statue to Kawasaki (and implies
was Kobo Daishi’s specific will and intention that his protective aura
should be manifested there) and is closely linked to the questions of
yakudoshi and yakuyoke
“The legends of founding and the image of power and sanctity so
constructed have fueled numerous other legends, stories, and reports
of benefits received at the temple throughout subsequent centuries,
and these too have contributed to its fame and increased the num-
bers of people who have come to the temple to seek help. In the mod-
em cra perhaps the most widely circulated of such stories relates
to the air raids that devastated Kawasaki on April 15, 1945, in the
closing months of World War II. The area around the temple was se-
verely damaged and many of its buildings were razed to the ground.
A few days earlier, however, the head priest had had a premonition
that the statue was in danger and moved it away from the temple.
‘Thus the statue was saved —miraculously, as temple officiants put it.
siven that the statue is the key to the temple's power as a religious
site, the priest's premonition saved the temple, while the story of the

miraculous powers were behind this warning) added to the temple's
fame and the numbers of people who subsequently came to seck its
assistance.

Kawasaki Daishi has had a major impact on the geography of its re~
gion. Located in the industrial city of Kawasaki just south of Tokyo,
the temple is surrounded by public utilities that bear its name and in-

dicate how important a local landmark it is: by car one reaches the
temple by coming off the capital's expressway Route One at the
Daishi exit; by bus by alighting at Kawasaki Daishi bus stop; by train
by alighting at the Keihin Railway's Kawasaki Daishi station. Between
the station and temple one passes through an arcade of shops and
stalls similar to those found before other temples and shrines: besides
shops selling ordinary goods, there isa preponderance of stores sell-
ing souvenirs connected to the temple and other lucky objects (engi-
mono) such as maneki neko (the beckoning cat, a traditional Japanese
symbol of good luck) and Daruma dolls (also signs of good fortune),
shops specializing in incense and other articles associated with reli-
gious practices and institutions, restaurants catering to the visitors,
and the like. Even inside the temple precincts one finds stalls selling
lucky objects and foodstuffs during festival times such as New Year.

The stations and shops are highly profitable for those that run
them, for the temple receives millions of visitors every year. Kawasaki
Daishi’s visitors regularly top 3 million during the first three days of

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J, Jr. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 63,
hitpiisite.ebrary.comiliblarizonalDoc?id=10015592&ppg=75

--- Page 28 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

ot PRracticatty RELGious

the year—in 1993 it received 3.15 million visitors in this period and
even a week after New Year's day the temple was crowded and
bustling. Besides New Year, the temple has a whole series of yearly
events (nenjii gydji) that are occasions of special rituals and can draw
people. The temple's cycle of calendrical rituals and festive events
form a temporal framework that organizes its year: in all, Kawasaki
Daishi’s list of nenjit gyaji details forty-one separate events throughout
the year—commencing with the opening fire ritual on New Year's
morning ( gancho daigomaku) to summon good fortune in the coming
year and ending with a ritual on the evening of December 31 to sweep
away the old year and the ills that went with it (joyar horaku). This rit-
ual calendar encompasses the two major forms of benefits we di
cussed earlier: from the summoning of good fortune at the beginning
of the new year to the banishing of bad fortune in the last rite of the
year. Its most recurrent feature is a ritual celebration of Kobé Daishi’s
holy day (ennichi) on the twenty-first day of each month.

Not all the calendrical events relate directly to genze riyaku. Some
relate to caring for the ancestors—as do the higan festivals of spring
and autumn in which families pray for the safety of their ancestors—
or to commemorations of important events in the (legendary) life of
the Buddha (such as hana matsuri, the Japanese commemoration of
the birth of Buddha (held on April 8) and nehan-e, the commemora-
tion of his passing from this life into paranirvana (February 15). This
does not mean that those who attend these services cannot say their
own private prayers for benefits, purchase amulets, or offer votive
tablets. The system is, as noted carlier, open and accessible at all
times. Particularly auspicious, however, are the numcrous special oc-
casions and festive times when praying for this-worldly benefits is
especially efficacious and encouraged, such as the monthly festive
ennichi when there is a market held at the temple.

Visitors need not limit their prayers to these special occasions in
the ritual calendar, however, or to their own private supplications
whenever they happen to be at the temple. They can seek special
prayer rituals from the priests in accordance with their own wishes
and needs. To cater to their needs, for example, there are regular
performances of the goma (fire) rittal—one of the most important
rituals conducted in the Shingon sect of Buddhism and the primary
ritual held at the temple connected to petitions for this-worldly
benefits. On normal weekdays, such goma rituals are held usually
cight times per day, the first at 6:00 a.m., the last at 7:00 p.m, while
there are normally nine performances on Sunday, which as elsewhere
tends to be the busiest day of the week for the temple. In the goma rit-
ual sacred sticks of wood (gomagi) bearing religious inscriptions and
petitioners’ specific requests are immolated in a sacred fire. The goma

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J.,Jt.. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 64,
hitpiisite.ebrary.comilibarizona/Doc?id=10015592&ppq=76

--- Page 29 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi.. http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

Benefits in the Religious System 65

ritual is found in a variety of forms in Japan—from the rituals of Eso-
teric Buddhist sects such as Shingon and Tendai, to new religiou
movements such as Bentenshii and Agonshi, to Shinto shrin
Kawasaki Daishi is by affiliation a Shingon Buddhist temple and hence
uses the special objects, incantations, gestures, and ritual actions laid
down in the Esoteric Buddhist manuals and texts of the Shingon sect.

The list of benefits that may be petitioned for at Kawasaki Daishi
through the goma ritual is extensive and impressive: according to
temple literature, such benefits include:

saiyaku shojo (cradication of calamitics)

anai anzen (family safety)

Aotsti anzen (traffic safety)

shobai hanjo (business prosperity)

shinjo anzen (physical safety)

byoki heiyu. (recovery from illness)

shingan joju (accomplishment of all one’s heart's wishes)

Aaiun manzoku (successful opening of fortune)

nytigaku joju (successful entry into school or college)

ryden joju (making a good marriage)

anzan manzoku (safe childbirth)

aij anzen (safety at sea)

aigai ryoko anzen (safe overseas travel)

jigyo hanei (business success)

ojé anzen (safety when undertaking building and construction
work)

‘ojo (protection from unlucky directions)

‘mushi fiji (protection against roundworm)

sono ta: shogan joju, o-fuda (also: fulfillment of all vows, talismans)

The final category represents a catchall that in effect means the ritual
can be utilized for whatever purpose the petitioner wants.

In outlining the meanings and processes of the goma ritual, the
temple affirms both its deep connection to Esoteric Buddhist thought
and practice and its efficacy as a means of providing the petitioner
with thisworldly benefits—which are, it is affirmed, produced
through the grace of Kobo Daishi allied to the spiritual purity and en-
deavor of the priests acting as the ritual officiants mediating and re~
laying the requests of the ordinary visitors to the figure of worship.

While petitioners may approach the holy figure directly in prayer, it
is generally considered more efficacious and ritually correct, in mat-
ters of great concern, to do this through the services of a trained re-
ligious officiant who is versed in the temple’s specific practices and
occupies a powerful position as priest and guardian of the sacred
statue, The ritual itself involves the burning of goma sticks to immo-

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J, Jt. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 65,
hitpiisite.ebrary.comiliblarizona/Doc?id=10015592&ppg=77

--- Page 30 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi..

66 PRracticatty RELGious

late symbolically the evil passions that hinder happiness. By removing
bad luck and danger, the ritual opens the way for good fortune and
happiness.

1c temple describes the “beneficial merits of the goma ritual”
(o-goma no kudoku) as follows:

The religious practice of the goma is a powerful rite that is under-
pinned by profound and highly significant philosophical meanings
and by the true doctrinal principles of Esoteric Buddhism as fol
lowed in the Shingon scet. The word “goma” comes from the San-
skrit homa, which means “to burn” or “sct fire to,” and expresses the
meaning of immolating the evil passions (bonné—the root of all
suffering) through the fire of Buddhist wisdom.

‘The goma ritual isa strictly Esoteric rite in which a priest (an as
cetic practitioner) who has cleared his body and spirit of impedi-
‘ments through ritual purification makes offerings of various things
such as five varicties of grains, incense, and flowers at the goma al-
tar situated before the main image of worship. In burning the goma
sticks in the central hearth of the altar the priest begins the service
of offering to the main image of worship: the Danger-Preventing
Daishi (Yakuyoke Daishi)..

‘The beneficial merits of the Daishi, as well as the prayers of the
spiritually pure priest, unite completely with the meritorious faith
ofall the worshipers. At the end of the rite, a goma talisman (o-goma
‘fuda), which is the crystallization of the spiritual power produced
by the performance of this austere ritual, is given to all who
participate.

Please make a sign of prayer and recite the sacred mantra of
Kobo Daishi (namu Daishi henjo hongo). Through this goma ritual all
‘one’s evil passions are burnt and purified, and all dangers are erad-
icated. Thus all one’s wishes concerning gaining good fortune—
family safety, business prosperity, healing of illness, the achieve-
ment of all wishes, and so on—begin to be realized."

‘This text thus affirms the point made in the Introduction about the
role and indeed the efficacy of Buddhism in providing good fortune
and protecting against misfortune. It is a high Buddhist rittal ex-
pressing core Buddhist values (such as the destruction of evil pas-
sions), underpinned by Buddhist thought and conducted by Bud-
dhist priests, which is able to produce this-worldly benefits. The text
also makes clear that yakuyoke is closely associated with—and, in
terms of the ritual process, is an integral part of—the acquisition of
good fortune. Thus the unity of different forms of benefit is affirmed:
at bottom yakuyoke and kaiun signify two sides of the same coin. Genze
riyaku, as manifested through the ritual, is produced asa result of the

http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J, Jt.. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.

Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 66,
hitpiisite.ebrary.comilibrarizona/Doc?id=100155928ppg=78

--- Page 31 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

Benefits in the Religious System 67

interaction of the priest fortified through observations of ritual pu-
rity, the ritual texts, ritual formulas, true faith, doctrinal correctness
in the performance of the ritual, and the commitment of the peti
tioner. Practice and the acquisition of benefits are thus inextricably
tied together.

Asa result of participating in the ritual, the petitioner receives a
talisman (fuda) that, as the temple states, represents the spiritual
power created by the ritual and may be taken home to provide pro-
tection. Fuda are similar to omamori in that they too are regarded as
manifestations (bunshin, kesshin) of the sacred entity enshrined at the
temple or shrine. Usually made of flat strips of shaped wood or paper
with religious inscriptions (at Buddhist temples these are generally
Buddhist prayers or mantras) as well as the
temple, and deity, these fuda are given to pet
their participation in the ritual services. They can also be purchased,
however, without the necessity of participating in such rituals. The
terms *fuda” and “omamori” are normally translated as “talismans” or
“amulets,” but cach of them can span the theoretical functions dif
ferentiated with these English words (the amulet as protective device,
the talisman as beckoner of good fortune): one can have protective
and fortune-beckoning fuda and similarly omamori. The prime differ-
ence between the two objects is that fuda are generally considered to
protect or bring fortune to an area (such as a house or building and
its occupants) or social group (a family, a company), while omamori
are normally considered to relate to a particular individual who wears
or carries it on his or her person. Such objects, as the description of
Kawasaki Daishi’s goma-related fuda illustrates, are usually considered
to represent the spiritual powers of a specific religious institution, de~
ity, and ritual performance and, asin the example of the migawari fiz
amulet mentioned carlicr, manifests the spiritual force of a particu
lar deity or figure of worship.

Besides fuda and omamori, petitioners at Kawasaki Daishi, as at
other religious institutions, whether Shinto, Buddhist, or some of the
new religions, can also avail themselves of numerous other protective
objects and amulets as well as lucky charms and talismans and other
“fortune-beckoning” objects (engimono). Petitioners can write their
requests on the gomagi, the wooden sticks that are immolated in the
goma ritual, to convey their messages to the buddhas and deities. At
Virtually all religious institutions, whether Shinto or Buddhist, they
can also avail themselves of such devices as votive tablets (ema) on
which they write their prayers and wishes and address themselves di-
rectly to the gods. Such votive tablets are thus “letters to the gods”
through which people can externalize, publicly express, and put into
concrete form an inner desire.

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J, Jr. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 67.
hitpiisite.ebrary.comilibarizona/Doc?id=10015592&ppg=79

--- Page 32 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

68 PRracticatty RELGious

Many other such objects are available at shrines and temples. Like
the Kawasaki Daishi goma fuda, they represent the idea of genzeriyaku
and constitute a means of expressing one’s desire for good fortune
and spiritual protection from bad luck. Such religious paraphernali
the most tangible aspect of the ritual process of seeking this-worldly
benefits, are virtually inseparable from the wider theme of the prac-
tices relating to genze riyaku—and to commercial issues, as well, since
they are sold at religious institutions and thus represent the econom-
ically profitable side of the pursuit of this-worldly benefits. Although
wwe discuss them in greater detail in Chapters 5 and 6, we mention
them here to show that institutions like Kawasaki Daishi provide their
petitioners with a variety of services related to this-worldly benefits,
not just in terms of formally organized prayer rituals such as the regu-
lar goma services, but also in more privatized ways.

The extensive list of benefits offered, combined the temple's
reputation, draws large numbers of petitioners. Their ranks have
been augmented in the past two decades by those who visit the temple
secking the protective benefit of traffic safety, which has become,
since the 1960s, one of the temple's specialties. Such is the popular~
i has had to establish a prayer
hall just for this purpose, complete with parking lot to accommodate
cars, motorbikes, and even wheelchairs. Prayer services occur in the
parking lot on a regular basis, almost hourly, and the lot is often full.
The temple’s services are sought out not just by individuals but by or-
ganizations as well: in 1993 a number of taxis belonging to taxi firms
in the area were seen being blessed in the lot, as well as buses and
other commercial vehicles. Temple records show that services have
been held from the 1960s onward for major commercial organiza-
tions such as the Seibu Department Store in Ikebukuro—which had
services for traffic safety for its automobiles—as well as regular ser-
vices for traflic safety on behalf of the Kanagawa prefectural police
force, which has its police cars and motorbikes blessed at the
temple.

Individual Wishes and Social Requests

As we have seen in this chapter, the occasions when people seck
benefits touch on every form of potential need: from calendrical
events related to the seasons to life-cycle events related to growing up
and developing into an adult, They deal not only with issues related
to individual success and prosperity but with matters for social groups
(such as family safety) or organizations (such as company prosperity)
Shrines and temples provide a comprehensive range of practices, rit-
uals, and sacred objects that can be utilized to express wishes and ac-

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J.,Jr.. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 68,
hitpiisite.ebrary.comilibrarizona/Doc?id=10015582&ppq=60

--- Page 33 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi. http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2 library arizona edu/lib/arizonal.

ous System

Kawasaki Daishi car blessing lot

quire benefits. And where existing services or forms of benefits are
unable to cater to particular needs, there is always the possibility of
creating new ones. We can sce, then, that this-worldly benefits are
widely sought and comprehensively available for total life care, and
the institutions that deal with them, such as Kawasaki Daishi and

Hozanji, frame the religious map of Japan and structure its religious
environment.
That the secking of benefits is not specifically or even primarily a

personal affair is demonstrated by the fact that organizations ranging
from commercial companies to the police force take part in group
prayers and petition for benefits at temples such as Kawasaki Daishi
We shall return to this topic in Chapter 5 where, besides looking at in-
dividual behavior associated with thisworldly benefits, we touch on
some of the social religious organizations (ko) whos raison d’étre is
linked with the pursuit of this-worldly benefits, as well as some of the
commercial enterprises that invoke the gods and patronize shrines
and temples in the pursuit of practical benefits

Our discussion of Kawasaki Daishi shows also that benefits are

closely related to actions and ideas formally prescribed in texts and
maintained by tradition, That pursuit of this-worldly benefits finds its
validation in textual sources, most notably Buddhist texts, has raised
interesting questions for Japanese Buddhist scholars, many of whom
would prefer to see the pursuit of benefits as an expedient or folk

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J, Jt. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 69,
hitpiisite.ebrary.comilibfarizona/Doc?id=100155928ppg=81

--- Page 34 ---
Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religi http://site.ebrary.com.ezproxy2.library arizona edu/lib/arizona/...

70 PRracticatty RELGious

practice that is not fully in accord with Buddhism proper. What do
the scriptures say, and how do Japanese Buddhist scholars, particu-
larly when looking through the prisms of their own sectarian per-
spectives, deal with the topic of genze riyaku? It is to such questions
that we turn next.

Reader, lan; Tanabe, George J, Jr.. Practically Religious : Worldly Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan.
Honolulu, HI, USA: University of Hawaii Press, 1998. p 70,
hitpiisite.ebrary.comilibrarizona/Doc?id= 1001 55928ppg=82
